LAW N° 47/2013 OF 16/06/2013 RELATING
TRANSFER OF CASES TO THE REPUBLIC
OF RWANDA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Definitions of terms
Article 2: Purpose of this Law
Article 3: Scope of this Law
Article 4: Competent Court
Article 5: Crimes triable in Rwanda
Article 6: Indictment
Article 7: Right to information
CHAPTER
EVIDENCE
II:
PRODUCTION
OF
Article 8: General Principles in evidentiary
matters

Article 9: Facts established by ICTR or the
Mechanism
Article 10: Evidence provided to ICTR or to
the Mechanism by witnesses
Article 11: Statement by expert witnesses
before the ICTR or the Mechanism
Article 12: Testimony provided to ICTR or the
Mechanism officials during investigations
Article 13: Documents and Forensic Evidence
collected by ICTR or the Mechanism
CHAPTER III: RIGHTS AND SECURITY
Article 14: Rights of an accused person
Article 15: Protection and assistance to
witnesses
Article 16: Testimony of a witness residing
abroad
Article 17: Defence Counsel
CHAPTER
REVIEW
IV:
APPEAL
Article 18: Appeal
AND
CASE

Article 19: Case review
CHAPTER
V:
COLLABORATION
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF
RWANDA
AND
THE
MECHANISM
SUBSEQUENT TO TRANSFER OF CASES
Article 20: Technical assistance from the
Mechanism
Article 21: Monitoring of proceedings
Article 22: Referral of cases
CHAPTER VI: ARREST AND DETENTION
Article 23: Arrest and detention of an accused
person
Article 24: Provisional detention
Article 25: Deduction for time spent in custody
Article 26: Conditions of detention
CHAPTER VII: TRANSITIONAL
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 27: Application of this Law
AND
Article 28: Validity of actions taken before the
commencement of this law

Article 29: Valadity of actions taken by ICTR
Article 30: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
Article 31: Repealing provision
Article 32: Commencement

LAW N° 47/2013 OF 16/06/2013 RELATING
TRANSFER OF CASES TO THE REPUBLIC
OF RWANDA
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 12
June 2013;
The Senate, in its session of 11 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 90, 92, 93, 94,
95, 108, 143, 145, 149, 160, 162, 190 and 201;
Pursuant to the United Nations Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the crime of
Genocide of 9 December 1948 ratified by the

Decree Law n° 08/75 of 12 February 1975 and by
Presidential Order n° 48/01 of 05/09/2008 lifting
the reservation of the Republic of Rwanda on
Article 9;
Pursuant to Organic Law n° 51/2008
09/09/2008
determining the
organization,
functioning and jurisdiction of courts as modified
and complemented to date;
Pursuant to Organic Law n° 04/2011/OL
03/10/2011
determining the
organization,
functioning and competence of the National
Public Prosecution Authority and the Military
Prosecution Department as modified and
complemented to date;
Considering the Statute of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and its Rules of
Procedure and Evidence;
Considering the United Nations Security Council
Resolutions 1503 of 2003 and 1504 of 2004
relating to completion of the mandate of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and
particularly the requirements to transfer cases
from the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda to national jurisdictions, including
Rwanda;
Pursuant to the United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1966 of 22 December 2010;

ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Definitions of terms
For the purpose of this Law, the following terms
shall mean as follows:
1º ICTR: International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda established pursuant to the
United
Nations
Security
Council
Resolution 955 of 8 November 1994;
2º Mechanism: Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals established by the
United Nations Security Council on 22
December 2010 to finish the remaining
tasks of the Tribunals for Rwanda and the
Former Yugoslavia, at the completion
their functions. Under this Law, the
Mechanism means Rwanda Branch.

Article 2: Purpose of this law
This Law shall determine the transfer of cases and
other related matters, from ICTR, the Mechanism
and other States to the Republic of Rwanda.
This Law shall also determine the procedures
admissibility of evidence collected by the ICTR,
the Mechanism and other States in proceedings
before competent Rwandan courts.
Article 3: Scope of this Law
This Law applies in matters concerning transfer
cases to the Republic of Rwanda from the
Mechanism and from other States, relating
crime of genocide perpetrated against Tutsi and
other crimes against humanity.
This Law also applies in other matters where there
is transfer of cases to the Republic of Rwanda
from other States or where transfer of cases or
extradition of suspects for other crimes is sought
by the Republic of Rwanda from other States.
Article 4: Competent Court
The High Court shall be the competent court
conduct on the first instance the trial of cases
transferred to Rwanda.
At the first instance, the case shall be tried by

single Judge assisted by the court registrar.
However, the President of the Court may at his/her
absolute discretion designate a quorum of three (3)
or more judges assisted by a court registrar
depending on his/her assessment of the
complexity and importance of the case.
Article 5: Crimes triable in Rwanda
Notwithstanding the provisions of other laws
applicable in Rwanda, a person whose case
transferred by the ICTR and the Mechanism
Rwanda shall be liable to be prosecuted only for
crimes falling within the jurisdiction of the ICTR.
Article 6: Indictment
The Prosecutor General’s Office shall adapt the
indictment from the ICTR, the Mechanism or
from other States in order to make them compliant
with the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure of Rwanda, and it shall be forwarded
the President of the High Court.
The High Court shall accept the indictments after
verifying that they fulfill the formal requirements
of the Code of Criminal Procedure of Rwanda.

Article 7: Right to information
Within a period of ten (10) days, from the time
when the High Court makes a decision, the
Registrar of the High Court shall notify the
Prosecutor of the Mechanism of the decision.
CHAPTER
EVIDENCE
II:
PRODUCTION
OF
Article 8: General Principles in evidentiary
matters
Evidence collected in accordance with the Statute
and the Rules of Procedure and production of
evidence of ICTR and the Mechanism may be
used in proceedings before the High Court.
The High Court shall not convict a person solely
on prior written statements of witnesses who did
not give oral evidence during the trial.
However, the High Court may convict a person on
the probative value of a prior written statement
it is corroborated by other witnesses.
Article 9: Facts established by ICTR or the
Mechanism
The High Court, at the request of a party, or on its

own motion and after hearing of the parties, may
accept facts established by the ICTR or the
Mechanism or may accept documentary evidence
from proceedings of the ICTR or the Mechanism
relating to the matters referred to in the case under
trial.
Article 10: Evidence provided to ICTR or to
the Mechanism by witnesses
Statements of testimonies of witnesses provided
before the ICTR or the Mechanism and records of
depositions of witnesses not made before the court
in accordance with its Procedure and evidence
shall be admissible before the High Court
provided that the testimony or deposition
relevant to a fact in issue. The High Court may
exclude evidence given by a witness under
protective measures where its probative value
outweighed by its prejudicial value.
Nothing in this article shall prejudice the right of
the accused to request the attendance of witnesses
as referred to in Paragraph One of this article for
the purpose of cross-examination.
When the testimony or deposition of a witness,
who was subject to a protection order of the
Mechanism, is admitted into the record, the
identity of the witness shall not be disclosed to the
public unless the Mechanism or the witness
authorizes such disclosure. If such a witness

called for cross-examination, the fact that the
individual testified at the ICTR or the Mechanism
will not be disclosed to the public unless
authorized by the Mechanism or the witness.
Article 11: Statement by expert witnesses
before the ICTR or the Mechanism
Statement of an expert witness entered into the
case file in any proceedings before the first Trial
Chamber of the ICTR or the Mechanism shall be
admissible as evidence in criminal proceedings
conducted in the High Court without the
appearance of the expert witness in the
proceedings.
If the statement of an expert witness referred to
Paragraph One of this Article is admitted in the
case file, it shall be admitted as evidence of fact
as an opinion the expert would have provided
the court.
Pursuant to Article 7 of this Law, the High Court
shall admit in the case file an expert witness
testimony basing on the statements the expert
adduced in the first instance Trial Chamber of
ICTR or the Mechanism in another case.
However, the expert shall have been previously
informed of his/her rights and obligations
regarding his/her testimony and the testimony
shall specify on the existence or non-existence
facts relevant to the case under trial.

This Article shall not deny the accused person
the right to request for the summoning of an
expert witness referred to in Paragraph One of this
Article for cross-examination or to call an expert
witness on his/her behalf to challenge the
statement of another expert witness given before
the ICTR or the Mechanism.
Article 12: Testimony provided to ICTR or the
Mechanism officials during investigations
A transcript of signed statements given to ICTR or
to the Mechanism officials during investigations
may be admitted as evidence and in a manner that
similar evidence would be admitted under the
Code of Criminal Procedure of Rwanda.
The relevant investigator of the ICTR or of the
Mechanism may also be examined with regard
the circumstances of the investigations conducted
and information obtained during when it was
being conducted.
When the signed statement of a witness who
subject to protection by ICTR or by the
Mechanism is admitted into the case file, or an
official of ICTR or the Mechanism who conducted
the investigation is asked on such a statement, the
identity of the witness shall not be disclosed
unless the Mechanism or the witness authorizes
such disclosure. No signed statement taken from

witness by an ICTR or the Mechanism
investigator shall be used to incriminate the
witness in any proceedings before Rwandan courts
in case the investigator did not explain to the
witness about his/her rights.
The examination of the ICTR or the Mechanism
investigator is expressly conducted subject to the
Vienna Convention on the Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations of 13 February
1946, which provides that United Nations Staff
are not subject to legal process unless the United
Nations Secretary General has waived the
immunity provided by the Convention.
Article 13: Documents and Forensic Evidence
collected by ICTR or the Mechanism
The High Court may use original documents or
their certified copies or forensic evidence
provided by a doctor or an expert and which are
collected by ICTR or by the Mechanism and they
shall be used by the High Court and treated as
they were obtained by relevant national
authorities.

CHAPTER III: RIGHTS AND SECURITY
Article 14: Rights of an accused person
Without prejudice to other rights guaranteed under
the laws of Rwanda, including the Constitution of
the Republic of Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as
amended to date, Laws relating to the Code of
Criminal Procedure of Rwanda and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, as ratified by the Decree-Law n° 08/75
12 February 1975, the accused person in the case
transferred by ICTR, by the Mechanism or by
other States to Rwanda shall be guaranteed the
following rights:
1º a fair and public hearing;
2º presumption of innocent until proved
guilty;
3º to be informed promptly and in detail in
language which he/she understands, of the
nature and the cause of the charge against
him;
4º adequate time and facilities to prepare
his/her defense;
5º a speedy trial without undue delay;

6º entitlement to counsel of his/her choice
any a examination. In case he/she has no
means to pay, he/she shall be entitled
legal representation;
7º the right to remain silent and not to be
compelled to incriminate him/herself;
8º the right to be tried in his/her presence;
9º to examine or have a person to examine
on his/her behalf the witnesses against
him/her;
10º to obtain the attendance and examination
of witnesses on his/her behalf under the
same conditions as witnesses against
him/her.
Without prejudice to the relevant laws on
contempt of court and perjury, no person shall be
criminally liable for anything said or done in the
course of a trial.
Article 15: Protection and assistance to
Witnesses
In the trial of cases transferred from the ICTR, the
Mechanism or other States, the High Court shall
provide appropriate protection for witnesses and
shall have the power to order protective measures
similar to those set forth in Articles 53, 69 and 75
of the Mechanism Rules of Procedure and

Evidence.
In the trial of cases transferred from the ICTR, the
Mechanism or other States, the Prosecutor General
shall facilitate the witnesses in giving testimony
including those living abroad, by the provision
appropriate immigration documents, personal
security as well as providing them with medical
and psychological assistance.
All witnesses who travel from abroad to Rwanda
to testify in the trial of cases transferred from the
ICTR, the Mechanism or other States shall have
immunity from search, seizure, arrest or detention
during their testimony and during their travel
and from the trials.
The High Court may establish reasonable
conditions towards a witness’s right of safety
the Country. As such, there shall be determination
of limitations of movements in the Country,
duration of stay and travel.
Article 16: Testimony of a witness residing
abroad
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 15

of this Law, where a witness is unable for good
reason to physically appear before the High Court
to give testimony, the judge may upon request of
party order that the testimony of such witness be
taken in the following manner:
1º by deposition in Rwanda or in a foreign
jurisdiction, taken by a competent
authority authorized by the Judge for that
purpose;
2º by video-link hearing taken by the judge
at trial;
3º by a judge sitting in a foreign jurisdiction
for the purpose of recording such viva
voce testimony.
The request for the taking of testimony in any of
the modes referred to in Paragraph One of this
Article shall indicate the names and whereabouts
of the witness whose testimony is sought, contain
a statement of the matters on which the witness
to be examined, and of the circumstances
justifying the taking of testimony in such manner.
The order granting the taking of testimony of
witness in any of the modes referred to
Paragraph One of this Article shall indicate the
date, time and the place at which such testimony
to be taken. It shall also require the parties to be
present to cross-examine the witness.

Testimony taken under this Article shall be
transcribed and form part of the trial record and
shall carry the same weight as viva voce testimony
heard at trial.
Article 17: Defence Counsel
Without prejudice to the provisions of other laws
of Rwanda, Defence Counsels and their support
staff shall have the right to enter into Rwanda and
move freely within Rwanda to perform their
duties. They shall not be subject to search, seizure,
arrest or detention in the performance of their
legal duties.
The Defence Counsel and his/her support staff
shall be provided with appropriate security and
protection, at their request.
CHAPTER
REVIEW
IV:
APPEAL
AND
CASE
Article 18: Appeal
Both the prosecution and the accused have the
right to appeal against any decision taken by the
High Court upon one or all of the following
grounds:
1º an error on a question of law invalidating
the decision;

2º an error of fact which has occasioned
miscarriage of justice.
The Supreme Court may uphold or invalidate
some or all of the decisions of the High Court.
Where necessary, it may order the High Court
review the case.
Article 19: Case review
Upon application for review by a party
accordance with the provisions of the law relating
to the Code of the Criminal Procedure, the
President of the High Court or the President of
Specialised Chamber of the High Court shall
constitute a bench composed of three (3) judges
the High Court in charge of taking a decision on
the application for a review of case with new
arguments the same court had tried.
The review proceedings shall be conducted
pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure of Rwanda.

CHAPTER
V:
COLLABORATION
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF
RWANDA
AND
THE
MECHANISM
SUBSEQUENT TO TRANSFER OF CASES
Article 20: Technical assistance from the
Mechanism
The Government of Rwanda may benefit from
technical assistance from the Mechanism to meet
the needs arising from the transfer of cases
Rwanda.
Article 21: Monitoring of proceedings
The Mechanism Prosecutor shall have the right
designate individuals to observe the progress of
cases transferred to Rwanda in accordance with
article 11bis D) iv) of the Mechanism Rules
Procedure and Evidence.
Observers appointed by the Mechanism
Prosecutor shall have access to court proceedings,
documents and records relating to the case as well
as access to all places of detention.
The Vienna Convention of 13 th February, 1946 on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations shall apply to the observers so appointed
by the Mechanism Prosecutor in accordance with
Article 29 of the Mechanism statute.

Article 22: Referral of cases
In the event that the Mechanism revokes an Order
of referral of cases it had transferred to Rwanda
pursuant to Article 11bis of the Mechanism Rules
of Procedure and Evidence, the accused shall be
promptly surrendered to the Mechanism together
with any files, documents, exhibits and all other
additional materials as stipulated in the order.
CHAPTER VI: ARREST AND DETENTION
Article 23: Arrest and detention of an accused
person
Except as otherwise provided in this Law, the
arrest and detention of the accused persons shall
be regulated in accordance with the Code
Criminal Procedure of Rwanda.
Article 24: Provisional detention
Any person transferred to Rwanda by the ICTR,
the Mechanism or any other State shall remain
provisional detention or free depending on the
situation in which he/she was transferred.
The case shall be referred to the competent Court
which shall decide whether the transferred person
can be prosecuted being under provisionally
detention or not.

Article 25: Deduction for time spent in
provisional detention
Deduction shall be given to the convicted person
for the period during which he/she has been
provisional detention or pending for the appeal.
Article 26: Conditions of detention
Any person who is transferred to Rwanda by the
ICTR, the Mechanism or any other State for trial
shall be detained in accordance with the minimum
standards of detention stipulated in the United
Nations Body of Principles for the Protection of
all persons under any Form of Detention
Imprisonment, adopted by General Assembly
resolution 43/173 of 9 December, 1998.
The International Committee of the Red Cross or
an observer appointed by the President of the
Mechanism shall have the right to inspect
conditions of detention of persons transferred
Rwanda by the ICTR, the Mechanism or any other
State.
The International Committee of the Red Cross or
the observer appointed by the Mechanism shall
submit a confidential report based on the findings
of these inspections to the Minister in charge of
Justice of Rwanda and to the President of the
Mechanism.

In case an accused person dies or escapes from
detention, the Prosecutor General shall
immediately notify the President of the
Mechanism and the Minister in charge of Justice
in Rwanda.
The
Prosecutor
General
shall
conduct
investigations on the death or the escaping of
detained person and shall submit a report to the
President of the Mechanism and the Minister
charge of Justice in Rwanda.
CHAPTER VII: TRANSITIONAL
FINAL PROVISIONS
AND
Article 27: Application of this Law
In the event of any inconsistency between this
Law and any other ordinary law, the provisions
this Law shall prevail.
Article 28: Validity of actions taken before the
commencement of this Law
Acts related to criminal procedure taken
accordance with Organic Law n° 11/2007
16/03/2007 concerning transfer of cases to the
Republic of Rwanda from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and from other
States shall remain valid.

Article 29: Validity of actions taken by ICTR
Provisions of this Law relating to actions taken by
ICTR shall remain valid in case they are not
contrary to the United Nations Security Council
Resolution 1966 of 22 December 2010 and to the
Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the
Mechanism.
Article 30: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
This law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 31: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions contrary to this Law are
hereby repealed.
Article 32: Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of its
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013

(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/ Attorney General