LAW
N o 20bis/2017
OF
28/04/2017
ESTABLISHING RWANDA EDUCATION
BOARD AND DETERMINING ITS MISSION,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article one: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Legal personality and autonomy
Article 3: Category of REB
Article 4: Head Office of REB
CHAPTER II: MISSION AND POWERS OF
REB
Article 5: Mission and powers of REB
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF REB AND PERFORMANCE CONTRACT
Article 6: Supervising authority of REB

Article 7: Performance contract
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF REB
AND
Article 8: Management organs of REB
Section One: Board of Directors
Article 9: Composition of the Board of Directors
of REB
Article 11: Responsibilities of the Board
Directors
Article 10: Powers of Board of Directors
Article 12: Duties of the Chairperson of the
Board of Directors
Article 13: Duties of the Deputy Chairperson
the Board of Directors
Article 14: Incompatibilities with membership
in the Board of Directors
Article 15: Reasons for loss of membership
the Board of Directors and modalities for
replacement
Article 16: Convening and holding of meetings
of the Board of Directors

Article 17: Invitation of a resource person to the
meetings of Board of Directors
Article 18: Approval of resolutions and minutes
of the meeting the Board of Directors
Article 19: Rapporteur of the Board
Directors
Article 20: Personal interest in issues on the
agenda
Article 21: Sitting allowances of members of the
Board of Directors
Section 2: Executive Organ
Article 22: Composition of the Executive Organ
of REB
Article 23: Responsibilities of the Executive
Organ
Article 24: Powers and responsibilities of the
Director General of REB
Article 25: Statutes governing the staff of REB
Article 26: Salary and other benefits for
members of the Executive Organ

Article 27: Organization, functioning and
responsibilities of organs of REB
CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 28: Property of REB and its sources
Article 29: Budget of REB
Article 30: Use, management and audit of the
property of REB
Article 31: Annual financial report
CHAPTER VI: MISCELLANEOUS AND
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 32: Transfer of staff, property, contracts
and liabilities
Article 33: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
Article 34: Repealing provision
Article 35: Commencement

LAW
N o 20bis/2017
OF
28/04/2017
ESTABLISHING RWANDA EDUCATION
BOARD AND DETERMINING ITS MISSION,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
March 2017;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 2003 revised in 2015, especially
Articles 20, 64, 69, 70, 88, 90, 91, 106, 112, 119,
120, 139, iya 165 and 176;

Pursuant to Organic Law n° 001/2016/OL
20/04/2016 establishing general provisions
governing public institutions;
Having reviewed Law n°44/2010 of 07/12/2010
establishing Rwanda Education Board (REB) and
determining its responsibilities, organisation and
functioning;
ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
This Law establishes Rwanda Education Board,
abbreviated as “REB”. It also determines
responsibilities, organization and functioning.
Article 2: Legal personality and autonomy
REB enjoys legal personality, administrative
functioning and financial autonomy and
governed in accordance with relevant laws.

Article 3: Category of REB
REB falls within the category of non-commercial
public institutions.
Article 4: Head Office of REB
The head office of REB is located in City of Kigali,
the Capital city of the Republic of Rwanda. It may
be transferred elsewhere on the Rwandan territory
if considered necessary.
REB may, if considered necessary, have branches
elsewhere in the country to successfully carry out
its mission upon approval by a Prime Minister’s
Order.
CHAPTER II: MISSION AND POWERS OF
REB
Article 5: Mission and powers of REB
REB has general mission to implement the
education policy relating to nursery, primary,
secondary and specialized education as well
adult basic education.
Particularly, REB has the following main mission:
1º to contribute to the development of education
policy;

2º to coordinate and fast track education
programmes and activities aimed at providing
to all categories of Rwandans
quality
education;
3º to prepare and distribute curricula, teaching
materials, teacher’s guides, methodologies and
establish teaching methods for nursery,
primary, secondary, specialized schools and
adult literacy education in accordance with the
current educational development;
4º to establish and monitor the distance learning
program;
5º to promote the use of information and
communication technology in education;
6º to coordinate programs and activities in order
to develop teachers, build their capacities,
improve and monitor their management;
7º to prepare, conduct and mark
examinations;
national
8º to publish national examinations results;

9º to orientate students of primary and ordinary
level schools who passed the national
examinations;
10º to advise Government on all activities which
may fast track education development
Rwanda;
11º to cooperate and collaborate with other
regional and international institutions having
similar missions.
REB has powers to award certificate or diplomas
students who passed national examinations.
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF REB AND PERFORMANCE CONTRACT
Article 6: Supervising authority of REB
A Prime Minister’s Order
supervising authority of REB.
Article 7: Performance contract
REB operates on the basis of performance contract.
Modalities for the conclusion and evaluation
performance contract of REB are determined
relevant laws.
determines
the

CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF REB
Article 8: Management organs of REB
AND
REB is comprised of the following two (2)
management organs:
1º Board of Directors;
2º Executive Organ.
Section One: Board of Directors
Article 9: Composition of the Board of Directors
of
REB
The Board of Directors of REB is composed
seven (7) members appointed by a Presidential
Order including the Chairperson and the Deputy
Chairperson.
Members of the Board of Directors are selected
the basis of their ability, competence and expertise.
At least thirty per cent (30 %) of members of the
Board of Directors must be females.
The term of office of members of the Board
Directors of REB as well as their replacement are
determined by a Presidential Order.

Article 10: Powers of Board of Directors
The Board of Directors of REB is the supreme
administrative and decision making organ. It has
full powers to make decisions related to the
management of staff and assets of REB in order
fulfil its responsibilities.
Article 11: Responsibilities of the Board
Directors
The main responsibilities of the Board of Directors
of REB are the following:
1 º to oversee the functioning of the Executive
Organ of REB and provide strategic guidance
to be followed by the Executive Organ
fulfilling its responsibilities;
2 º to approve strategic plan and action plan
REB and related reports;
3 º to conclude a performance contract with the
supervising authority of REB;

4 º to approve procedure manuals and internal
rules and regulations of REB;
5 º to approve the draft budget proposal of REB
and monitoring budget use and execution;
6 º to decide on all critical matters falling within
the mission of REB;
7 º to approve the draft of organizational structure
of REB which is established by a Prime
Minister’s Order;
8 º to evaluate the functioning of REB
accordance with the action plan and the budget;
9 º to solve conflicts related to work between the
management of Executive Organ and REB
staff;
10 º to submit the quarterly and annual activity
reports as well as financial reports to the
supervising authority of REB.
Article 12: Duties of the Chairperson of the
Board of Directors
The Chairperson of the Board of Directors has the
following duties:

1° to chair the Board of Directors and
coordinate its activities;
2° to convene and preside over meetings
the Board of Directors;
3° to submit minutes of meetings of the Board
of Directors of REB to its supervising
authority;
4° to sign the performance contract between
the Board of Directors and the supervising
authority of REB;
5° to submit reports of REB adopted by the
Board of Directors to relevant organs;
6° to follow up the implementation
resolutions of the Board of Directors;
7° to perform other duties assigned to him/her
by the Board of Directors falling within
responsibilities.
Article 13: Duties of the Deputy Chairperson
the Board of Directors
The Deputy Chairperson of the Board of Directors
has the following duties:
1° to assist the Chairperson and deputize for
him/her in his/her absence;

2° to perform any duties assigned to him/her
by the Board of Directors falling within
responsibilities.
Article 14: Incompatibilities with membership
in the Board of Directors
Members of the Board of Directors are not allowed
to perform any remunerated activity within REB.
Members of the Board of Directors are also not
allowed, whether individually or companies
which they hold shares, to bid for tenders of REB.
Article 15: Reasons for loss of membership
the Board of Directors and modalities for
replacement
A member of the Board of Directors loses
membership if:
1° the term of office expires;
2° he/she resigns in writing;
3° he/she is no longer able to perform his/her
duties due to physical or mental disability
certified by a Committee of three (3)
authorized medical doctors;

4° he/she is sentenced to a term
imprisonment equal to or exceeding six (6)
months in a final judgement;
5° he/she fails to attend three (3) consecutive
meetings without valid reasons;
6° he/she manifests any behaviour likely
compromise his/her dignity, that of his/her
work or his/her position;
7° he/she jeopardizes the interests of REB;
8° he/she is convicted of the crime
genocide or genocide ideology;
9° he/she no longer fulfils the requirements
considered at the time of his/her
appointment;
10° he/she dies.
In case a member of the Board of Directors leaves
office before expiry of his/her term of office, the
competent authority appoints a substitute. The
substitute appointed completes the predecessor’s
term.
Article 16: Convening and holding of meetings
of the Board of Directors
The Board of Directors of REB is held every
quarter and whenever necessary upon invitation
its Chairperson, or Deputy Chairperson in case

absence of its Chairperson at his/her own initiative
or upon request in writing by at least one third (1/3)
of its members.
The invitation is submitted in writing to the
members of the Board of Directors at least fifteen
(15) days before the meeting is held.
However, an extraordinary meeting is convened
writing at least three (3) working days before the
meeting is held.
Among items to be examined by the meeting of the
Board of Directors in the first quarter of the year
include the approval of the financial and activity
reports for the previous year.
Every quarter, the Board of Directors must
examine the financial and activity reports relating
to the previous quarter to be transmitted to the
supervising authority of REB.
The quorum for a meeting of the Board of Directors
to take place is two-thirds (2/3). However, when
meeting is convened for the second time it takes
place regardless of the number of members present.
The Director General attends the meetings of the
Board of Directors but he/she has no right to vote
during decision making.

Modalities for decision-making by the Board
Directors are determined by the internal rules and
regulations of REB.
Article 17: Invitation of a resource person to the
meetings of the Board of Directors
The Board of Directors of REB may invite to
meetings any person from whom it may seek
advice on a certain item on the agenda.
The invited person is not allowed to vote and take
part in debates on other items on the agenda.
Article 18: Approval of resolutions and minutes
of the meeting the Board of Directors
Resolutions of the meeting of the Board
Directors are signed by its members present
immediately after the end of the meeting, and their
copy is sent to the supervising authority of REB
a period not exceeding five (5) working days.
The head of the supervising authority of REB gives
his/her views on the resolutions of the meeting
the Board of Directors in a period not exceeding
fifteen (15) working days from their receipt. If this
period expires before he/she gives his/her views,

the resolutions of the meeting are considered
definitively approved.
The minutes of the meeting of the Board
Directors are signed by the Chairperson and the
Rapporteur and approved during the next meeting.
A copy of minutes of the meeting is sent to the
supervising authority of REB in a period not
exceeding fifteen (15) days from the day of
approval.
Article 19: Rapporteur of the Board
Directors
The Director General of REB serves as the
rapporteur of the meetings of the Board
Directors.
The Director General of REB does not participate
in the meetings that make decisions on issues that
concern him/her.
In case of his/her absence, the internal rules and
regulations of REB determine the person to replace
him/ her.
Article 20: Personal interest in issues on the
agenda
When a member of the Board of Director has
direct or indirect interest in the issue to
examined, he/she must immediately inform the
Board of Directors about where his/her interest lies.

The member who declares an interest in the issue
to be examined cannot attend the meeting
deliberating on that issue.
When it appears that many or all Board members
of the Board of Directors have a direct or indirect
interest in the issues to be examined in such a way
that it is impossible to make a decision on the
issues, the issues are submitted to supervising
authority of REB to decide on them within thirty
(30) days.
Article 21: Sitting allowances of members of the
Board of Directors
Sitting allowances of members of the Board
Directors are determined by a Presidential Order.
Section 2: Executive Organ
Article 22: Composition of the Executive Organ
of REB
The Executive Organ of REB is composed of the
Director General appointed by a Presidential Order
and other staff members recruited in accordance
with relevant laws.
A Presidential Order may also appoint Deputy
Directors General and determine their powers and
responsibilities.

Article 23: Responsibilities of the Executive
Organ
The main responsibilities of the Executive Organ
of REB are the following:
1° to ensure the implementation of the decisions
of the Board of Directors of REB;
2° to ensure good management of personnel and
assets of REB;
3° to prepare and submit to the Board of Directors
the draft of the procedure manuals and that
the internal rules and regulations of REB;
4° to advise the Minister in charge of education
the implementation of policy related
nursery, primary and secondary education;
5° to submit a quarterly activity report to the
Board of Directors of REB;
6° to perform such other duty assigned to it by the
Board of Directors falling within
responsibilities.

Article 24: Powers and duties of the Director
General of REB
The Director General of REB has the powers
make decisions on the administrative and financial
management of REB in accordance with relevant
laws.
Particularly, the Director General of REB has the
following responsibilities:
1° to monitor and coordinate the daily
activities of REB;
2° to draft and submit the draft budget
proposal to the Board of Directors for the
following year as well as the finacial report
for the previous year;
3° to ensure the budget implementation and
management of REB property;
4° to submit the activity report to the Board
Directors of REB on a quarterly basis and
at any time necessary;
5° to serve as the legal representative of REB
and publicize its activities;
6° to serve as the spokesperson of REB;

7° to implement the decisions and
instructions from the supervising organs;
8° to serve as a rapporteur of the Board
Directors;
9° to perform any other duty assigned
him/her by the Board of Directors falling
within its responsibilities.
The responsibilities of other staff of the Executive
Organ of REB are determined by a Prime
Minister’s Order.
Article 25: Statutes governing the staff of REB
The staff of REB are governed by the General
Statutes for Public Service.
Article 26: Salary and other benefits for
members of the Executive Organ
The salary and other benefits for the members
the Executive Organ of REB are determined
accordance with the relevant laws.
Article 27: Organization, functioning and
responsibilities of organs of REB
The organization, functioning and responsibilities
of organs of REB are determined by a Prime
Minister’s Order.

CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 28: Property of REB and its sources
The property of REB comprises movables and
immovables.
The property derives from the following sources:
1º State budget allocations;
2º State or development partners’ subsidies;
3º income from services rendered;
4º interest from its property;
5º loans granted to REB as approved by the
Minister in charge of finance;
6º donations and bequests.
Article 29: Budget of REB
REB prepares its annual budget to be approved
the relevant authority and executed in accordance
with relevant laws.

Article 30: Use, management and audit of the
property of REB
The use, management and audit of the property
REB are carried out in accordance with relevant
laws.
The internal audit of REB submits its report to the
Board of Directors and provides a copy to the
Director General of REB.
Article 31: Annual financial report
Within three (3) months following the closure
the financial year, the Director General of REB
submits to the supervising authority of REB the
annual financial report after its approval by the
Board of Directors in accordance with laws
governing the management of State finance and
property.
CHAPTER VI: MISCELLANEOUS AND
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 32: Transfer of staff, property, contracts
and liabilities
Staff members, movable and immovable assets
well as contracts and liabilities previously owned
by Rwanda Education Board (REB) established
Law n°44/2010 of 07/12/2010 establishing

Rwanda Education Board (REB) and determining
its responsibilities, organisation and functioning
are transferred to REB established under this Law,
according to its mission and organisational
structure.
Acts done by Rwanda Education Board (REB)
established by Law n°44/2010 of 07/12/2010
establishing Rwanda Education Board (REB) and
determining its responsibilities, organisation and
functioning remain valid.
Article 33: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
This Law was drafted, considered and adopted
Kinyarwanda.
Article 34: Repealing provision
Law n° 44/2010 of 07/12/2010 establishing
Rwanda Education Board (REB) and determining
its responsibilities, organization and functioning
and all prior legal provisions contrary to this Law
are repealed.

Article 35: Commencement
This Law comes into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 28/04/2017
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MUREKEZI Anastase
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General