Gazette n o Special of 16/06/2013
Lois
Itegeko Ngenga n°08/2005 ryo
mu Rwanda………………………………………….4
Law n° 08/2005 of 14/07/2005
de la Loi Organique n° 08/2005
Rwanda………………………………………………………...8
Ngenga n°01/2010/0L ryo
ivugururwa ry’amategeko……………………………………63
Law nº 01/2010/0L of 09/06/2010
Organique n° 01/2010/0L du
é forme L é gislative…………………………………………...63
y’u Rwanda ishinzwe Ivugururwa
n’imikorere byayo…………………………………….......67
Law Reform Commission
Commission Rwandaise de R
et son fonctionnement……………………………67

Gazette n o Special of 16/06/2013
Ngenga n° 01/2005
mu Rwanda………………………………...93
Law n° 01/2005 of 14/02/2005
de la Loi Organique n° 01/2005
au Rwanda…………………………………………..93
y’Imirimo y’Ibarurishamibare
Activities in Rwanda…………………..……………97
Statistiques au Rwanda……………………………...97
Ngenga nº 53/2008 ryo
mu Rwanda (RDB) rikanagena
kandi ryujujwe kugeza
Law nº 53/2008 of 02/09/2008
determining its responsibilities,
to date……………………………………………………..115
Organique nº 53/2008 du 02/09/2008
au Rwanda (RDB) et déterminant
telle que modifiée et complétée
Iterambere mu Rwanda
Development Board (RDB)
pour la promotion du Développement
organisation et son fonctionnement…………………….......119
Ngenga n° 05/2005 ryo
ishinzwe kwegeranya ibimenyetso
mu Rwanda mu mwaka wa
Law n°05/2005 of 14/04/2005
for collection of evidence indicating
perpetrated in Rwanda in 1994……………………………143

Gazette n o Special of 16/06/2013
de la Loi Organique n° 05/2005
Nationale Ind é pendante charg
Français dans le genocide
ryuzuza Itegeko Ngenga n° 31/2007
ryahinduwe kandi ryujujwe
complementing Organic Law
death penalty as modified and complemented
complétant la Loi Organique
mort telle que modifiée et complétée

LAW N° 03/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
ORGANIC LAW N° 08/2005
DETERMINING THE USE AND
OF LAND IN RWANDA
OF CONTENTS
One: Purpose of this Organic Law
2: Repealing of the organic law
3: Transitional provision
4: Drafting, consideration and adoption
Organic Law
5: Repealing provision
6: Commencement

ORGANIC LAW N° 03/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
REPEALING ORGANIC LAW N° 08/2005
14/07/2005 DETERMINING THE USE AND
MANAGEMENT OF LAND IN RWANDA
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND WE
SANCTION,
PROMULGATE
THE
FOLLOWING ORGANIC LAW AND ORDER
IT BE PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL
GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 14 May
2013;
The Senate, in its session of 22 May 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04/06/2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
94, 95, 108, 201 and 202;
Having reviewed Organic Law n° 08/2005
14/07/2005 determining the use and management
land in Rwanda;

ADOPTS:
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
This Organic Law repeals Organic Law n o 08/2005
of 15/07/2005 determining the use and management
of land in Rwanda.
Article 2: Repealing of the organic law
Organic Law n° 08/2005 of 14/07/2005 determing
the use and management of land in Rwanda is hereby
repealed.
Article 3: Transitional provision
As long as they are not yet modified, laws, orders
and instructions implementing the Organic Law
08/2005 of 15/07/2005 determining the use
management of land in Rwanda in force shall remain
applicable as long as their provisions are consistent
with the law governing land in Rwanda.
Article 4: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
This Organic Law was drafted, considered
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 5: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions contrary to this Organic

Law are hereby repealed.
Article 6: Commencement
This Organic Law shall come into force on the date
of its publication in the Official Gazette of
Republic of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr. HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

LAW N° 43/2013 OF 16/06/2013 GOVERNING
LAND IN RWANDA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One : Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Definitions of terms
Article 3: Land is common heritage
Article 4: Equal right to land
Article 5: Right to emphyteutic lease
Article 6: Freehold right to land
Article 7: Size of land that can be granted
freehold title
Article 8: Freehold title on land of the State and
local authorities
CHAPTER II: CATEGORIZATION OF LAND
Section One: Urban and rural land
Article 9: Urban land as opposed to rural land

Section 2: Individual land and public land
Article 10: Individual land
Article 11: Public land
Article 12: State land in the public domain
Article 13: Land in the public domain of local
authorities
Article 14: State land in the private domain
Article 15: Land in the private domain of local
authorities
Article 16: Public institutions land
CHAPTER III: LAND ADMINISTRATION
AND MANAGEMENT
Section One: Land allocation, acquisition and
lease
Article 17: Land allocation, acquisition and lease
Article 18: Certificate of land allocation
Article 19: Swamps land tenure

Section 2: Land registration
Article 20: Obligation to register land
Section 3: Transfer of land rights
Article 21: Right to transfer land
Article 21: Prior consent to transfer of land
Section 4: Foreigners’ rights on land
Article 23: Emphyteutic lease on land
Article 24: Freehold title based on the condition
of reciprocity or international conventions
Section 5: Land sub-lease for agricultural,
forestry and livestock production
Article 25: Sub-leasing land
Article 26: Authentic document for sub-leasing
and its registration
Section 6: Land use management and
protection
Article 27: Land use and development planning

Article 28: Modalities
sustainable use of land
of
protecting
and
Article 29: Land for Special Economic Zones
Article 30: Land use consolidation
Section 7: Land administration and management
institutions
Article 31: National institution in charge of land
registration and geo-information services
Article 32: District Land Bureau
Article 33: Land Committees
CHAPTER IV:
OBLIGATIONS
LAND
RIGHTS
Section One: Land rights
Article 34: Enjoyment of full rights
Article 35: Developments found on
presumed to be land owner’s property
AND
land

Article 36: Rights on natural resources
Section 2: Land obligations
Article 37: Special conditions for conservation
and exploitation of land
Article 38: Servitudes
Article 39: Obligation of exploiting a land in
productive way
Article 40: Land considered to be properly
exploited
Article 41: Land considered not to be properly
exploited
Article 42: Non-hindrance to underground and
space activities
Article 43: Land tax and lease fee
Article44 : Emphyteutic lease termination
CHAPTER V: PRESCRIPTION
Article 45: Application of the civil code
Article 46: Prescription period

Article 47: Non bona fide occupation
Article 48: Borrowed properties
Article 49: Non-prescription between family
members
CHAPTER VI: CRIMINAL PENALTIES,
ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISIONS
AND
SANCTIONS
Section One: Criminal penalties
Article 50: Application of penal code
Section 2: Administrative decisions
sanctions
and
Sub-section one: Common provisions
Article 51: Organ in charge of land use
inspection
Sub-Section 2: Decision of temporary requisition
of land
Article 52: Reasons for temporary requisition
land
Article 53: Notification for requisition of land
Article 54: Assignment of requisitioned land

Article 55: Degraded or unexploited land
private domain of the State or its organs
Sub-section 3: Repossession of requisitioned land
Article 56: Right to request for repossession
requisitioned land
Article 57: Assessment of the repossession
request
Sub-section 4: Confiscation of land
Article 58: Land subject to confiscation
Article 59: Competent authority to confiscate
land
Article 60: Written formal notification
Article 61: Indication of confiscation reasons
Sub-section 6: Administrative fine sanction
Article 62: Fine related to intentional violations
in respect to processing and issuance of land
titles and maintenance of land registry
Article 63: Enforcing authority for payment

administrative fine
CHAPTER
VII:
MISCELLANEOUS,
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 64: Land valuation
Article 65: Land surveying
Article 66: Abagererwa’s land rights
Article 67: Responsibility to assist in land
acquisition
Article 68: Land sharing
Article 69: Land that can be allocated
Article 70: Recognition of free transfers of land
Article 71: Status of previous freehold rights
Article 72: Legal effect of acts done prior to the
publication of this law
Article 73: Transitional provision
Article 74: Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Law

Article 75: Repealing provision
Article 76: Commencement

LAW N°43/2013 OF 16/06/2013
GOVERNING LAND IN RWANDA
43/2013
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 10 June
2013;
The Senate, in its session of 6 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of o4 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in its Articles 11, 29, 30, 31, 32, 62,
67, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 108 and 201;
Pursuant to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples Rights of June 27, 1981 signed
November 11, 1981 in Addis Ababa, especially
Article 14, as ratified by Law n° 10/1983 of May
17, 1983;

Pursuant to the International Convention
Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against
Women of May 1, 1980 ratified by Presidential
Order n° 431/16 of 10/11/1981;
Pursuant to Organic Law n o 04/2005 of 08 th April
2005 determining the modalities of Protection,
Conservation and Promotion of Environment
Rwanda;
Having reviewed the King’s Decree of 14
September 1886 related to land use, management
and registration, as modied and complemented
date;
Having reviewed the Decree of 30/7/1888
establishing Book III of the Civil Code related
contracts and conventional obligations, as modified
and complemented to date, especially in Articles
417, 418, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, and
426;
Having reviewed the King’s Decree of 9/08/1893
related to selling and leasing State land;
Having reviewed Decree of 31 st July 1912
establishing Book II of the Civil Code related
goods and various modifications on the property
modified and complemented to date, especially
Articles 10, 11, and 12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24,

26, 27, all articles composing title III related to
transfer of immovable property and all articles
composing Title IV related to emphyteutic lease;
Having reviewed Decree of 30 th May 1922 related
to authentic documents and land titles;
Having reviewed Decree of 26 th April 1932
determining requirements for changing from
provisional land occupation contract into
empheteutic lease;
Having reviewed Decree of 26 th April 1932 related
to land and implementation of conventional medical
obligations;
Having reviewed Decree of 24 th January 1943
related to free land cessions and concessions
scientific and religious associations and
organizations of public interest;
Having reviewed Decree of 12 th June 1951 related
to illegal land occupancy;
Having reviewed Decree of 21 st April 1953
determining the transfer of land and the right
repossess land granted by Rwanda [–Urundi]
authorities;
Having reviewed Decree of 14 th February 1956
determining fees for land registration;

Having reviewed the Decree of 11 th July 1960
related to land use and management;
Having reviewed Decree N o 530/1 of 26 th May 1961
related to “ubukonde” in Kisenyi and Ruhengeri
territories;
Having reviewed Decree-Law N o 09/76 of 4 th March
1976 relating to purchasing and selling
customary rights and occupation rights on land;
ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One : Purpose of this Law
This Law determines modalities of allocating,
acquisition, transfer, use and management of land
Rwanda.
It also establishes the principles applicable to rights
recognised over all lands situated on Rwanda’s
national territory and all rights united
incorporated with land, whether naturally
artificially.
Article 2: Definitions of terms
For the purpose of this Law, the following terms
shall be defined as follows:

1° special economic zones: a geographically
specified and physically secured area administered
by a single body, offering certain incentives
including more liberal and simplified economic
regulations for businesses to physically locate and
operate within it;
2° flowing natural water: water flowing without
any human intervention;
3 o swamp: a plain area between hills or mountains
with water and biodiversity, and where papyrus
carex or plants of their species grow;
4° land use consolidation: a procedure of putting
together small plots of land in order to manage
land and use it in an efficient and uniform manner
so that its productivity is increased;
5 o national roads: international roads that link
Rwanda with neighbouring countries; roads that
link Districts or that link a District and the City
Kigali; roads that link areas of tourist significance
and facilities of national or international importance
such as ports and airports;
6° District and Kigali City roads: roads linking
different Sectors’ headquarters within the same

District or those that are used within the same
Sector as well arterial roads that connect Districts
roads to rural community centres that are inhabited
as an agglomeration populated area;
7° land tenure: the system by which land is held,
describing the rights, responsibilities and
restrictions that are attached to the land holder;
8° donation: a transfer from one person to another
of a full right over a land property of which
belonged to the transferer;
9° escheat land: a piece of land with no heir. Such
land is succeeded by the State and falls into
private domain;
10° vacant land: a piece of land abandoned
definitely by the owner;
11 o freehold: type of land tenure granting full and
indefinite rights over the land;
12 o local authorities: decentralised administrative
authorities of the country with legal personality;
13° land assignment: a temporary transfer by
State of the right to use land to a third party when
the lessee or owner has failed to fulfil land use
directives and obligations;

15° agriculture and livestock: all activities carried
out on the land related to crops and plants and
rearing of any animals, forestry and nurseries;
14° expropriation: an act of taking away
individuals' land by the State due to public interest
in circumstances and procedures provided by law
and subject to fair and prior compensation;
16° emphyteutic lease: a long term contract
between the State and a person to exploit land
return for a periodic agreed fee payment;
17° land rights: inalienable ability of individuals
groups of individuals to obtain, possess and utilize
land at their discretion, so as long as their activities
on the land, do not violate the inalienable rights
others;
18° servitudes: a right a person is entitled to on
land that is not his or hers due to circumstances.
Such right is provided for by law or from mutual
agreement between the concerned parties;
19° land: the surface of the earth identified
specific boundaries, including the airspace above
that portion of surface, the minerals beneath it, and
surrounding
biodiversity,
erections
and

developments on that surface. In legal terms, it is
immovable and permanent asset inclusive of rights
associated with the surface of the earth from
centre to the infinite sky;
20° competent authority: one or several organs
with powers provided for by law;
21° prescription: a procedure of definitive
possession of rights over property or losing rights
over property due to expiration of a certain period
of time provided for by law;
22° sublease: a contract between a lease holder and
another person so that the latter may exploit
former's land in return for payment of an agreed
fee;
23º land registrar: a public officer responsible
keeping and updating the land register;
24 o person: an individual, a group of individuals
co-owning land, a business company,
organisation or association with legal personality;
25 o lessor: the authority owning leased land. In this
law, it is the State, public institutions and local
governments;

26° foreigner: an individual without Rwandan
nationality, a group of individuals co-owning land,
a business company, an organisation or association
with legal personality from a foreign country;
27° land title: a written document confirming
person's rights to land, which is governed by written
laws and delivered according to the law
competent authority. It applies to the emphyteutic
lease as well as to the freehold, or any other form
land tenure legally provided for;
Article 3: Land is common heritage
28 o pasture land: an area with pasture and various
plants for animals to graze.
The land is part of the common heritage of all
Rwandan people: the ancestors, present and future
generations.
Notwithstanding the recognised rights of people,
only the State has the supreme power
management of all land situated on the national
territory, which it exercises in the general interest
all with a view to ensuring rational economic and
social development as defined by law.
Therefore, the State is the sole authority to accord

rights of occupation and use of land. It also has
right to order expropriation in the public interest.
Article 4: Equal right to land
All forms of discrimination, such as that based
sex or origin, in relation to access to land and
enjoyment of real rights shall be prohibited.
The right to land for a man and a woman lawfully
married shall depend on the matrimonial regime
they opted for.
Article 5: Right to emphyteutic lease
Every person who is in possession of land, acquired
either in accordance with custom, or granted by
competent authority, or by purchase, is
recognized proprietor under an emphyteutic lease
accordance with the provisions of this law.
Article 6: Freehold right to land
Any Rwandan citizen is entitled to be granted
freehold title to land reserved for residential,
industrial, commercial, social, cultural or scientific
services.
Freehold rights shall apply only to developed land
where infrastructures are erected and its extent shall
be strictly limited to the area of land that

necessary to support the authorised developments
on the land and their amenity.
For a group of individuals co-owning land,
business company, an organisation or association
with legal personality, freehold title can only
granted if at least 51% of its stake is owned
Rwandan citizens, except for land designated
Special Economic Zones.
Modalities for obtaining freehold title
determined by an Order of the Minister in charge
land.
Article 7: Size of land that can be granted
freehold title
The size of land that can be granted freehold title
shall not exceed five (5) hectares.
However, the Minister in charge of land, basing
a reasonable case made by the applicant, may
authorise freehold rights on an area larger than five
(5) hectares.
Article 8: Freehold title on land of the State and
local authorities
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles
and 7 of this Law, all land belonging to the State,
whether in the public or private domain, shall

granted freehold title irrespective of whether it
developed or not. This shall also apply to land
owned by public institutions and local authorities.
CHAPTER II: CATEGORIZATION OF LAND
Section One: Urban and rural land
Article 9: Urban land as opposed to rural land
Urban land shall be land which is confined within
boundaries of towns or cities established by
Presidential Order.
All remaining land shall be considered as rural land.
A Presidential Order determines any other land that
is considered as urban land.
Section 2: Individual land and public land
Article 10: Individual land
Private individual land shall comprise land acquired
through custom or written law.
That land has been granted definitely by competent
authorities or acquired by purchase, donation,
inheritance, succession, ascending sharing, and
exchange or through sharing.

This Law offers equal protection to rights over land
resulting from all channels stipulated in
preceding paragraph.
Article 11: Public land
Public land consists of land in public and private
domain of State, land belonging to public
institutions and land that belongs to local authorities
whether being in their public domain or in their
private domain.
The State may donate to any public institution
local authority its land reserved for public or private
domain.
Public institutions or local authorities may also
acquire land by purchasing it or by donation from
individuals or associations, and that land shall fall
under their private or public domain.
Article 12: State land in the public domain
State land in the public domain consists of all land
meant to be used by the general public or land
reserved for organs of State services as well
national land reserved for environmental protection.
Those lands include:

1° land occupied by lakes and rivers as listed by
Order of the Minister in charge of water as natural
resources;
2° shores of lakes and rivers up to the length
determined by an Order of the Minister in charge
water as natural resources starting from the furthest
line reached by water depending on successive
floods, excluding exceptional floods;
3° land occupied by springs and wells determined
accordance with an Order of the Minister in charge
of water as natural resources;
4° national land comprised of natural forests,
national parks, protected swamps, State public
gardens and tourist sites;
5° islands as listed by an Order of the Minister
charge of land;
6° national roads and their boundaries;
7° land reserved for public State activities and
infrastructures;
8º land on which memorial sites for genocide
perpetrated against the Tutsi in Rwanda.

Article 13: Land in the public domain of local
Government
Land in the public domain of local authorities
consists of the following categories:
1° land reserved for public
infrastructures of local authorities;
activities
and
2° Districts and City of Kigali roads and that
other urban areas linking different Sectors
headquarters within the same District, or those
roads that are used within the same Sector with their
boundaries;
3 o arterial roads that connect Districts roads to rural
community centres that are inhabited as
agglomeration with their boundaries;
4 o land reserved for public cemeteries.
Article 14: State land in the private domain
State land in the private domain land shall consist
all the land that is not included in State land
reserved for public activities or infrastructures and
land that does not belong to public institutions
local authorities or individuals.
That land shall be comprised of the following:

1° vacant lands;
2° escheat lands;
3° confiscated lands in
provisions of this Law;
4° State land previously occupied by public
activities removed from public domain
accordance with the laws;
5° land acquired by the State through
purchase, donation or expropriation
public interests;
6° unprotected swamps;
7° land occupied by State owned forests;
8° land resulting from non-renewed lease
issued to foreigner as provided by this Law;
9° land reserved for specific cemeteries.
respect
of
The transfer of state land from public domain
private domain mentioned in Article 12 of this Law
from point one (1°) to point five (5°) shall be done
by law, while from point six (6°) to point seven (7°)
the transfer shall be done by an Order of the Prime
Minister. The land referred to in point eight (8°)
shall not be transferable.

Article 15: Land in the private domain of local
authorities
Land in the private domain of local authorities
consists of the following categories:
1° local authorities land not reserved to
used for public activities;
2° local authorities land previously used
public activities but which was removed
from public domain in accordance with
laws;
3° land acquired by the local authorities
through purchase, donation or expropriation
for public interests;
4° land occupied by local authorities’ forests;
5° confiscated land as provided by this Law.
The transfer of land from the public domain of local
authorities to their private domain shall be done
an Order of the Minister in charge of land
proposal by the competent local authority.
Article 16: Public institutions land
Land in public domain of public institutions shall
consist of land reserved for public para-statal
institutions activities and infrastructures.

Land in private domain of public institutions shall
consist of the following categories:
1° land not reserved for public activities use
by public institutions;
2° public institutions land previously used
public activities but which was removed
from public domain in accordance with
law;
3° land acquired by public institutions through
purchase, donation or expropriation
public interests;
4° land occupied by public institutions forests.
The transfer of land from the public domain
public institutions to their private domain shall
done by an Order of the Minister in charge of land
on proposal by the supervising Authority.
CHAPTER III: LAND ADMINISTRATION
AND MANAGEMENT
Section One: Land allocation, acquisition and
lease
Article 17: Land allocation, acquisition and lease
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles

and 7 of this Law, the right to land is granted by
State in the form of emphyteutic lease.
The land lease period can not be less than three
years and can not exceed ninety- nine years (99),
however it can be renewed.
Procedures for land allocation, lease, the exact
number of years of land lease and its renewal shall
be determined by a Presidential Order.
Allocation and acquisition of land for investment
shall be based on approved business plan by
competent authority in accordance with
importance and value of the investment.
Allocation of public land in private domain
investment shall be done through an open
competition except when authorised by an Order
the Prime Minister on a well defined land.
Article 18: Certificate of land allocation
Certifying that the land has been allocated or leased
shall be evidenced by a certificate of land
registration issued by the registrar of land titles.
In case of loss or damage of the certificate of land
registration, the registrar of land titles issued
replacing one.

A Presidential Order determines the functioning and
powers of the registrar of land titles.
Article 19: Swamps land tenure
Swamp land belongs to the State. It shall
definitively be allocated to individuals and
person can use the ground of holding it for a long
time to justify the definitive takeover of the land.
However, it may be lent to a person based
agreement concluded between both parties.
A Prime Minister Order shall draw a list of swamp
land, their classification and boundaries and set
modalities of their use, development, and
management for the sustainable benefit of
Rwandans.
Section 2: Land registration
Article 20: Obligation to register land
Registration of land is obligatory for that land
owner.
An Order of the Minister in charge of land shall
specify modalities and procedures for land

registration and cancellation of land registration.
Section 3: Transfer of land rights
Article 21: Right to transfer land
Without prejudice to the provisions of this Law
relating to the area of the land which cannot be sub-
divided, land rights may be transferred between
persons through succession, gift, inheritance,
ascending sharing, rent, sale, sublease, exchange,
servitude, mortgage or any other transaction,
conformity with the conditions and methods
provided for by the laws and regulations.
Article 21: Prior consent to transfer of land
Any transaction on land rights made by a family
representative requires the consent of all
registered right holders on the land title. Persons
not legally qualified to represent their own interests
shall be represented by a person authorized to do
under the law.
The consent shall be conveyed through an authentic
document signed by the concerned persons or upon
them appending their fingerprints, before
competent notary in land matters.

Section 4: Foreigners’ rights on land
Article 23: Emphyteutic lease on land
Without prejudice to the provisions of Articles 6,
and 8 of this Law, foreigners shall be entitled to
emphyteutic lease on land, whether acquired from
private persons or the State. The lease period can
not exceed forty-nine (49) years, and shall be based
on a land use plan and business plan approved
competent authorities. The lease period shall
renewable.
Article 24: Freehold title based on the condition
of reciprocity or international conventions
A foreigner may be granted freehold title
provided for by an international convention that
Rwanda is signatory to or under the condition
reciprocity deriving from bilateral agreements.
In Special Economic Zones, a foreigner shall
treated as a national and may be granted a free hold
title.

Section 5: Land sub-lease for agricultural,
forestry and livestock production
Article 25: Sub-leasing land
This Law recognises and protects sub-lease contract
for agriculture, livestock and forest land.
An Order of the Minister in charge of land
determines modalities of sub-leasing stated in this
article.
Article 26: Authentic document for sub-leasing
and its registration
The sub-leasing of lands provided for in Article
of this Law shall be concluded in an authentic form.
If the sub-leasing period is five (5) years or more,
shall be registered. If the sub-leasing period is less
than five (5) years, its registration shall be optional
based on agreement between the both parties.
However, any sub-leasing carried out by a guardian
on behalf of a minor or other person not qualified
represent him/herself shall not exceed a period
five (5) years.

Section 6: Land use management and
protection
Article 27: Land use and development planning
The national land management shall be governed
the law relating to the planning of land use and
development in Rwanda.
All land leases and land transactions shall respect
the land use plans of the area where the land
located.
Article 28: Modalities
sustainable use of land
of
protecting
and
Modalities of protecting and sustainable use of land
shall be determined by an Order of the Prime
Minister.
Article 29: Land for Special Economic Zones
Special Economic Zones shall be determined by
specific law.
A Presidential Order shall determine
management and use of land in Special Economic
Zones.

Article 30: Land use consolidation
For purposes of optimization of productivity,
Order of the Minister in charge of Agriculture and
Animal Resources shall set up procedures and
modalities of land use consolidation for agricultural
and livestock purposes.
It is prohibited to subdivide plots of land reserved
for agriculture and animal resources if the result
such subdivision leads to parcels of land of less than
a hectare in size for each of them.
Owners of lands prohibited to be subdivided shall
co-own and use the land in accordance with
laws.
Section 7: Land administration and management
institutions
Article 31: National institution in charge of land
registration and geo-information services
Land registration, issuance of land title and
maintenance of land register, land management,
geo-information services shall be carried out by
competent national institution.
Article 32: District Land Bureau
A land Bureau is hereby established at the District

level and is headed by a District Land Officer.
An Order of the Minister in charge of land
determines responsibilities, organisation and
functioning of the Land Bureau at District level and
determines working relationship with other
institutions in charge of land.
The District Land Officer and other designated
officer by a Presidential Order, acts as public notary
in all matters pertaining to land in accordance with
legislation related to notarised deeds.
The District Land Bureau shall be technically
answerable to the national institution in charge
the national land registry and geo-information
services.
Article 33: Land Committees
There is hereby established Land Committees
responsible for follow up of management and use
land.
The organization, functioning, responsibilities,
composition of Land Committees and level
operation shall be determined by an Order of
Minister in charge of land.

CHAPTER IV:
OBLIGATIONS
LAND
RIGHTS
AND
Section One: Land rights
Article 34: Enjoyment of full rights
The land owner shall enjoy full rights to exploit
his/her land in accordance with the provisions
this Law and other laws.
The State recognizes the right to freely own land
and shall protect the land owner from being
dispossessed of the land whether totally or partially,
except in case of expropriation due to public
interest.
Article 35: Developments found on
presumed to be land owner’s property
land
All buildings, crops and other works found on land
that have been performed by the land owner using
his/her money or otherwise are presumed to be his
hers.
However, this does not prohibit any other person
own buildings, crops and any other works on other
person land in accordance with procedures provided
for by this Law, other laws or agreement with
land owner.
When buildings or crops have been developed by
person on the land that is not his/hers through

procedures that are contrary to laws or agreement
with land owner, the later has the right to request
the person who performed them to remove such
development without prejudice to the land owner
claim indemnities for any damages suffered.
Article 36: Rights on natural resources
Rights on land containing minerals and quarries
shall be held by the person that has proof of legal
allocation.
Minerals and quarries designated as such are State
property.
Section 2: Land obligations
Article 37: Special conditions for conservation
and exploitation of land
Contracts granting rights on land issued by the State
shall specify special conditions to be fulfilled
the conservation and exploitation of the land
accordance with the intended use of the land.
Article 38: Servitudes
The land owner shall not act against other people's
rights. In that regard he/she shall not:
1° refuse passage to his/her neighbours leading
to their parcels when there is not any other

way. However, for other passage, this
should be convenient for both parties;
2° block water that is naturally flowing
through his / her land;
3° refuse other people to access water from
well found on his or her land unless he
she can prove that such a well has been dug
by him or her.
Article 39: Obligation of exploiting a land in
productive way
Any person owning land shall exploit it in
productive way and in accordance with its nature
and intended use.
Any person who uses another person’s land, either
basing on agreement he/she entered into with
owner of the land or whether he/she was assigned
it through legal procedures is required to properly
maintain it and use it in a productive manner.
Article 40: Land considered to be properly
exploited
Any land with crops, buildings or infrastructures,
land with forests and seedling, land that has been
under fallow for not more than three (3) years,
harvested land, as well as any land on which
reasonable number of livestock is grazed either
individuals, associations or organizations with legal

personality shall be considered to be properly
exploited and in a productive way.
Article 41: Land considered not to be properly
exploited
It shall be considered not to be properly exploited,
if:
1° the land is not protected from soil erosion;
2° the land meant for agriculture is
covered by crops or other plants at least
to a half (1/2) of its area;
3° the land meant for grazing does not respect
grazing regulations or is not covered
pasture for animals up to at least one half
(1/2) of its area;
4° the land meant for buildings and/or
infrastructures is not developed within
period prescribed by competent authority.
Article 42: Non-hindrance to underground and
space activities
A land owner shall not hinder underground

activities or those in the space above his / her land
when such activities are of public interest.
If such activities cause any loss to him/ her, he/she
shall receive fair compensation.
Article 43: Land tax and lease fee
A land owner with freehold title shall pay property
tax as provided for by the law.
A land owner with emphyteutic lease shall pay
lease fees as provided for by a Presidential Order.
Article 44: Emphyteutic lease termination
In case the lessee does not comply with the lease
contract obligations other than those stipulated
article 38 of this Law, the lessor may terminate
lease after a written warning notice of fifteen (15)
working days, without any other formalities.
CHAPTER V: PRESCRIPTION
Article 45: Application of the civil code
Without prejudice to specific provisions stipulated

by this Law, provisions of the Civil Code
prescription shall apply to land related matters.
Article 46: Prescription period
In land related matters, the prescription period
shall be thirty (30) years. The prescription shall
ascertained by a decision of a competent court.
Article 47: Fraudulent occupation
A person who, through fraudulent means, occupies
vacant and escheat land or other people's land,
cannot invoke the right to prescription to claim
definite right on it, even if he/ she has occupied
for a period longer than the prescription period
provided under Article 46 of this Law.
Article 48: Borrowed properties
Any person who occupies other people's land
borrowing shall not claim ownership right on that
land based on prescription, whatever the period
the occupation. Such a land shall be managed by
State in accordance with law.
Article 49: Non-prescription between family
members
There shall be no prescription among members
the same family.

The family referred to in this Article shall
determined by the order of sucession as defined
the relevant law.
CHAPTER VI: CRIMINAL PENALTIES,
ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISIONS
AND
SANCTIONS
Section One: Criminal penalties
Article 50: Application of the penal code
Crimes against the management and use of land,
provided for by this Law, shall be punishable
accordance with the penal code.
Section 2:
sanctions
Administrative
decisions
and
Sub-section One: Common provisions
Article 51: Organ in charge of land use
inspection
The Sector administration is in charge of inspecting
whether the land is properly exploited and in
productive way.
Every year, at the latest on 31 st March, Sector
authority shall make, to the District administration,
an inspection report on the use of individual land,
land allocated by the State or its institutions
investors, land in private domain of the State and
institutions with legal personality.

District authority, after analysing those reports,
shall send to the Minister in charge of land
assessment note with recommendations.
Sub-Section 2: Decision of temporary requisition
of land
Article 52: Reasons for temporary requisition
land
Where there is tangible evidence that land meant
agriculture, livestock or forestry, has spent a period
of three (3) consecutive years when it is not in use
with no sound reason, the Minister in charge of land
has power to order requisition of the land for
period of three (3) years.
When the land owner does not demonstrate the will
and the capability to use that land, that period may
be renewable.
If it is clear that the land is degraded or its disuse
a cause of insecurity, the Minister in charge of land
may requisition it irrespective of the period
mentioned in paragraph one of this article.

Article 53: Notification for requisition of land
Requisition of land mentioned in paragraph one
article 52 of this Law shall be carried out after
written formal notice of forty five (45) working
days has been given to the land right holder or
person who was supposed to utilize it.
Article 54: Assignment of requisitioned land
The requisitioned land may be assigned to another
person who so requests and who demonstrates
ability to efficiently conserve it and productively
exploit it.
Conditions and modalities for assignment shall
established by an Order of the Minister in charge
land.
Article 55: Degraded or unexploited land
private domain of the State or its organs
When State land in the private domain or that
other State institutions is degraded, is about to
degraded or is unexploited, it shall be temporarily
allocated to an interested person, who has
demonstrated the willingness and capability
make it productive, for a period not exceeding five
(5) years.
The owning institution of that land shall allocate

based on a business plan and has the power
renew that period once agreed by both parties.
However, that institution can repossess that land
before the expiry of the agreed period after giving
appropriate compensation which is estimated based
on development on land.
Sub-section 3: Repossession of requisitioned land
Article 56: Right to request for repossession
requisitioned land
The owner of the requisitioned land as referred to
Article 52 of this Law, may request for
repossession after expiry of the period of
assignment. The request is directed to the organ that
has requisitioned the land.
However, no compensation shall be given upon
repossession of land that was requisitioned.
He or she shall enter into repossession upon
showing commitment, in writing, to efficiently use
it and productively exploit it within a period of
more than one (1) year following the repossession.
Article 57: Assessment of the repossession
request
Application for the repossession of land shall

submitted to the Minister in charge of land
accompanied with a new business plan showing
new strategies for its proper exploitation.
When the request is rejected, the Minister in charge
of land shall communicate to the concerned party,
in writing within a maximum period of thirty (30)
working days, the reasons for rejecting the request
and inform him/her what should be rectified
consideration.
When the applicant is not happy with that decision,
he/she shall refer the matter to a competent court.
Sub-section 4: Confiscation of land
Article 58: Land subject to confiscation
Any land in the following categories may
confiscated:
1° the land that was requisitioned
mentioned in Article 52 of this Law, which
was given back to the owner who fails
respect the provisions of Article 56 of this
Law.
2° the land which was requisitioned for less
than thirty (30) years years and the owner
did not apply for its repossession;
3° the land within urban areas where a detailed
physical plan was approved by competent
authorities and it is clear that it has spent

three (3) consecutive years unexploited;
4° the land with approved physical plan, that
is designated for rural settlement or land
designated for fast development
competent authority, that has spent three
consecutive years unexploited;
5° land whose emphyteutic lease contract was
terminated as provided for under Article
of this Law.
Land stipulated in items 1º, 3º and 4º of this article
can not be confiscated when there are tangible
reasons of its non exploitation.
Article 59: Competent authority to confiscate
land
The Minister in charge of land shall have the power
to confiscate land stipulated in article 58 of this law,
in items one (1º) and two (2º).
Land stipulated in Article 58 of this Law, in items
three (3º), four (4º) and five (5º), shall
confiscated by the authority that issued the land title
based on proposal of District authority where that
land is located.

Article 60: Written formal notification
The decision to confiscate the land from the land
right owner cannot be taken before he/she has been
given a written formal notice of ninety (90) days
of the date of receipt by the concerned person.
If the land right owner cannot be found, the written
formal warning shall be given to the person using
the land and a copy of it posted on notice boards
the District, Sector and Cell offices, where the land
is located for a period of ninety (90) days as of
date of the last posting. That notice shall also
posted at any place of gathering of a lot of people
the cell where the land is located and also published
in newspapers recognised by the State.
Article 61: Indication of confiscation reasons
The decision to confiscate land from its owner shall
indicate the reason thereof in accordance with
law.
Such a decision shall indicate the day on which
owner was notified for the failure or bad
exploitation of the land.

Sub-section 6: Administrative fine sanction
Article 62: Sanction related to intentional
violations in respect to processing and issuance
of land titles and maintenance of land registry
A registrar of land titles or any other official
charge of land registration, who deliberately,
violates regulations related to processing, issuance
of land titles and maintenance of land registry, shall
be liable to an administrative fine of one hundred
thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000)
Rwandan Francs.
Article 63: Enforcing authority for payment
administrative fine
The supervising authority of the official mentioned
in Article 62 of this Law shall have the power
enforce the payment of the administrative fine and
ensures that it is deposited in the national treasury
within prescribed period.
CHAPTER
VII:
MISCELLANEOUS,
TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 64: Land valuation
Land property valuation profession and modalities
of its practice shall be determined by the relevant
laws.

Article 65: Land surveying
Land surveying and demarcation profession as well
as modalities of its practice shall be determined
the relevant laws.
Article 66: Abagererwa’s land rights
Persons that were granted land by “Abakonde”
according to the decree N o 530/1 of 26 th May 1961
related to “ubukonde” land regime in Kisenyi and
Ruhengeri Territories, are, since September 15
2005, considered like any other customary land
occupants.
Article 67: Responsibility to assist in land
acquisition
The Government has the responsibility to allocate
land to persons denied rights on their land due
historical reasons.
Article 68: Land sharing
Land sharing that was carried out between 1994 and
30 th June 2012, when the first systematic
registration of all lands was completed,
recognised by the law. Holders of such land shall
enjoy the same rights as those under customary
holdings.
A person who could have qualified for land sharing
when it was still ongoing, but did not, because

not being in the Country during the land sharing
period, may seek for resettlement by
Government. His/her request shall be submitted
the District Authority where his/her land was
located.
There shall be no compensation in land sharing.
Article 69: Land that can be allocated
The land that can be allocated to persons denied
rights on their land due to historical reasons consists
of:
1° escheat land;
2° private State land;
3° private public institutions land;
4° local authorities’ private land;
Article 70: Recognition of free transfers of land
This Law recognizes free transfers on land granted
by the State as restricted occupation and
exploitation right.
Nevertheless, for purposes of land registration, such
rights shall be converted into emphyteutic lease,
after assessment of compliance with prior given
conditions.

Article 71: Status of previous freehold rights
Any person legally holding freehold rights to land
before the coming into force of this Law retains
those rights.
Article 72: Legal effect of acts done prior to the
publication of this Law
All acts concluded before the publication of this
Law in the official Gazette of the Republic
Rwanda on basis of Organic Law N o 08/2005
15/07/2005 determining the use and management
land in Rwanda shall remain valid.
Article 73: Transitional provision
As long as they are not yet amended, all laws,
orders and instructions implementing Organic Law
N o 08/2005 of 15/07/2005 determining the use and
management of land in Rwanda shall remain
applicable as long as their provisions are consistent
with this Law.
Article 74: Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Law
This Law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.

Article 75: Repealing provision
King’s Decree of 14 th September 1886 related
land use, management and registration, as modified
and complemented to date;
King’s Decree of 9/08/1893 related to selling and
leasing state land;
Decree of 30 th May 1922 related to authentic
documents and land titles;
Decree of 26 th April 1932 determining requirements
for changing from provisional land occupation
contract into empheteutic lease;
Decree of 26 th April 1932 related to land and
implementation
of
conventional
medical
obligations;
Decree of 24 th January 1943 related to free land
cessions and concessions to scientific and religious
associations and to organizations of public interest;
Decree of 12 th June 1951 related to illegal land
occupancy;
Decree of 21 st April 1953 determining the transfer
of land and the right to repossess land granted

Rwanda [– Urundi] authorities;
Decree of 14 th February 1956 determining fees
land registration;
Decree of 11 th July 1960 related to land use and
management;
Decree N o 530/1 of 26 th May 1961 related
“ubukonde” in Kisenyi and Ruhengeri Territories;
Decree-Law N o 09/76 of 4 th March 1976 relating
purchasing and selling of customary rights and
occupation rights on land;
and all prior legal provisions contrary to this Law,
are hereby repealed.
Article 76: Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the day of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013

(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

LAW Nº 04/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
ORGANIC LAW Nº 01/2010/OL
09/06/2010
ESTABLISHING
THE
LAW REFORM COMMISSION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
One: Purpose of this Organic Law
2: Repealing of the Organic Law
3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
Organic Law
4: Repealing provision
5: Commencement

LAW Nº04/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
ORGANIC LAW Nº 01/2010/OL
09/06/2010
ESTABLISHING
THE
LAW REFORM COMMISSION
KAGAME Paul,
of the Republic;
PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
ORGANIC LAW AND ORDER
BE PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
PARLIAMENT:
Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 15 May
Senate, in its session of 22 May 2013;
to the Constitution of the Republic of
of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
95, 108, 201 and 202;
reviewed Organic Law n o 01/2010/OL of
establishing the National Law Reform

One: Purpose of this Organic Law
Organic Law repeals Organic Law
of 09/06/2010 establishing the
Law Reform Commission.
2: Repealing of the Organic Law
Law nº 01/2010/OL of 09/06/2010
the National Law Reform Commission
hereby repealed.
3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
Organic Law was drafted, considered and
in Kinyarwanda.
4: Repealing provision
prior legal provisions contrary to this Organic
are hereby repealed.

5: Commencement
Organic Law shall come into force on the date
its publication in the Official Gazette of the
of Rwanda.
on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr. HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice / Attorney General

LAW
N°
44/2013
OF
16/06/2013
ESTABLISHING THE RWANDA LAW
REFORM COMMISSION (RLRC) AND
DETERMINING
ITS
MISSION,
ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Definitions of terms
Article 3: Duration, independence
autonomy of the Commission
Article 4: Head office
CHAPTER II:
COMMISSION
and
MISSION
OF
Article 5: Mission
THE
CHAPTER
III:
COLLABORATION
BETWEEN THE COMMISSION AND ITS
SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
Article 6: Supervizing authority of the
Commission

Article 7 : Collaboration
Commission and the Ministry
between
Article 8: Performance contract
CHAPTER IV: ORGANS
COMMISSION
AND
RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 9: Organs
the
OF
THE
THEIR
Section One: Council of Commissioners and
its responsibilities
Article 10: Responsibilities of the Council of
Commissioners
Article 11: Members of the Council of
Commissioners, their term of office and
incompatibilities
Article 12: Appointment of members of the
Council of Commissioners
Article 13: Taking oath of Commissioners
Article 14: Salary and other benefits entitled
to Commissioners
Article 15: Removal of a Commissioner
Article 16: Replacement of a member of the
Council of Commissioners

Section 2: Bureau of the Commission and
responsibilities
Article 17: Composition of the Bureau of the
Commission
Article 18: Responsibilities of the Bureau
the Commission
Article 19: Responsibilities of the Chairperson
of the Commission
Article 20: Responsibilities of the Vice
Chairperson of the Commission
Article 21: Responsibilities of the Secretary
of the Commission
Section 3: Advisory
responsibilities
Council
Article 22: Members of t h e
Council and their responsibilities
and
Advisory
Article 23: Appointment of members of the
Advisory Council and their term of office
CHAPTER V: FUNCTIONING OF THE
ORGANS OF THE COMMISSION
Section One: Functioning of the Council
Commissioners
Article 24: Meetings of the Council of the
Commissioners

Article 25:
minutes
Decision
making
and
Article 26: Consideration of reports
Section 2: Functioning of the Bureau
RLRC
Article 27: Meetings of the Bureau of RLRC
Section 3 : Functioning of the Advisory
Council
Article 28: Meetings of the Advisory Council
Article 29: Internal rules and regulations
CHAPTER VI: STAFF AND PROPERTY OF
THE COMMISSION
Section One: Staff of the
Commission
Article
30:
Determination
of
organizational structure
the
Article 31: Staff
Section 2: Property of the Commission
Article 32: Property and its sources
Article 33: Management, use and audit
property

Article 34: Budget
CHAPTER VII: MISCELLENEOUS
AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 35: Actions taken
enforcement of this Law
Article 36: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
before
the
consideration
and
Article 37: Repealing provision
Article 38: Commencement

LAW
N°
44/2013
OF
16/06/2013
ESTABLISHING THE RWANDA LAW
REFORM COMMISSION (RLRC) AND
DETERMINING
ITS
MISSION,
ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONING
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
11 June 2013;
The Senate, in its session of 10 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date
especially in articles 61, 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90,
92, 93, 94, 95, 108, 113, 176, 183, 201 and 202;
Pursuant to the Treaty for the establishment of

the East African Community of 30/11/1999 as
amended to date and as ratified by Presidential
Order n° 24/01 of 28/06/2007;
ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
This Law establishes the Rwanda Law Reform
Commission abbreviated as “RLRC”.
Article 2: Definitions of terms
As used in this Law, the terms bel ow shal
have t he f ol l owi ng me ani ngs :
1° “Ministry”: Ministry in charge of
justice;
2° “Minister”: Minister in charge of
justice.
Article 3: Duration,
autonomy of RLRC
independence
and
RLRC is a permanent independent public
institution with legal personality, administrative
and financial autonomy.

Article 4: Head office of RLRC
The Head Office of RLRC shall be located in
Kigali City, the Capital of the Republic of
Rwanda. It may be transferred elsewhere within
the Republic of Rwanda if deemed necessary.
CHAPTER II: MISSION OF RLRC
Article 5: Mission
The overall and permanent mission of RLRC
shall be to review Rwandan laws with a view to
ensure their development and reform.
In particular, RLRC shall be responsible for:
1° analyzing Rwandan laws and providing
recommendations to relevant authorities
for their improvement, modernization
and reform with an emphasis on:
a. the elimination of imperfections in laws,
repealing obsolete or unnecessary legal
provisions and simplification of the
wording and understanding of laws;
b. the eestablishment of new methods of
practicing law and new concepts in
consonance with the values and changing
needs of the Rwandan Society;

c. the support to and improvement of
proper administration of justice;
2° conducting studies designed to assess
laws applicable in the country in order to
identify those that are not implemented
and the new ones that may be necessary
and
advise
relevant
authorities
accordingly;
3° ensuring proper codification and revision
of Rwandan laws;
4° identifying laws provided under the
Constitution that are not yet put in place
and preparing related draft proposals;
5° preparing draft proposals for laws that
need to be modified;
6° harmonizing national laws in force with
principles provided under international
instruments ratified by Rwanda;
7° advising the Government and the
Parliament on reform of laws in order to
make them consistent with the
Constitution;
8° providing public institutions with legal
advice on law reform-related draft laws
or any other law reform-related issue;

9° receiving and considering any proposals
for reform of laws that are submitted by
an institution or any interested person.
In order to fulfill its mission, RLRC shall
collaborate with other public and private
institutions, whether national or international as
well as national or international non-
governmental organizations.
CHAPTER
III:
COLLABORATION
BETWEEN RLRC AND ITS SUPERVISING
AUTHORITY
Article 6: Supervizing authority of the
Commission
RLRC shall be under the supervision of the
Ministry in charge of justice.
Article 7 : Collaboration between RLRC and
the Ministry
RLRC shall forward draft laws that it has
initiated to the Ministry for consideration before
forwarding them to the Cabinet for approval.

Article 8: Performance contract
There shall be concluded a performance contract
between the Ministry and the Council of
Commissioners determining the powers, rights
and obligations of each party in order to achieve
the mission of RLRC.
This contract shall be valid for a period
equivalent to the term of office of the
Commissioners and shall be signed by the
Minister and the Chairperson of RLRC.
The internal rules and regulations of the
Commission shall determine modalities and time
for evaluation.
The performance contract shall also include the
following details:
1° responsibilities of RLRC;
2° expected results of RLRC;
3° methodologies to be used by RLRC to
achieve its mission;
4° the source of property, its use and the
permanent audit procedure;
5° functioning of RLRC.

CHAPTER IV: ORGANS OF RLRC AND
THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES
Article 9: Organs of RLRC
RLRC shall have the following organs:
1° the Council of Commissioners;
2° the Bureau of RLRC;
3° the Advisory Council.
Section One: Council of Commissioners and
its responsibilities
Article 10: Responsibilities of the Council of
Commissioners
The Council of Commissioners shall be the
supreme authority of RLRC
The C oun ci l of Commissioners shall have the
following responsibilities:
1° to identify laws which require reform;
2° to approve draft proposals of laws which
require adoption or reform;
3° to approve the internal rules and
regulations of RLRC;
4° to approve a long term strategic plan of
RLRC;
5° to approve the annual plan of action of
RLRC;

6° to prepare and adopting the draft budget
of RLRC;
7° to prepare the organizational structure of
RLRC;
8° to adopte the report of the activities of
RLRC;
9° to make decisions on any other matters
relating to the mission of RLRC.
Article 11: Members of the Council of
Commissioners, their term of office and
incompatibilities
The Council of Commissioners shall be
composed of seven (7) Commissioners, including
the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson and the
Secretary, performing their duties on
permanent basis during their term of office. They
shall be Rwandan lawyers with relevant
knowledge and professional experience in the
legal field. At least thirty per cent (30%) of the
Commissioners must be females.
Members of the Council of Commissioners shall
have a renewable term of office of five (5) years.
Commissioner’s activities shall be incompatible
with any other remunerated activity.

Article 12: Appointment of members of the
Council of Commissioners
Members of the Council of Commissioners shall
be appointed by a Presidential Order.
Article 13: Taking oath of Commissioners
Before assuming their duties, Commissioners
shall, before the Supreme Court, take the oath
prescribed by article 61 of the Constitution of the
Republic of Rwanda.
Article 14: Salary and other benefits entitled
to Commissioners
The salary and other benefits entitled to
Commissioners shall be determined by
Presidential Order.
Article 15: Removal of a Commissioner
A member of the Council of Commissioners
shall leave office under one of the following
circumstances:
1° expiration of the term of
office;
2° resignation in writing;
3° physical
or
mental
incapacity
ascertained by an authorized medical
doctor;

4° he/she is sentenced to a term equal to
exceeding six (6) months imprisonment
without suspension of sentence;
5° failure to attend five (5) consecutive
meetings of RLRC in one year without
valid reasons;
6° assignement to new
duties;
7 ° failure to fulfill his/her responsibilities
as approved by the Council
Commissioners;
8 ° when it is evident that he/she no longer
fulfills the requirements considered at the
time he/she was appointed as member
of the Council of Commissioners;
9° he/she is convicted of the crime of
genocide ideology;
10° he/she pleads guilty and confesses
the crime of genocide;
11° death.
Article 16: Replacement of a member of the
Council of Commissioners
The Council of Commissioners shall, in a written
notice, indicate to the Minister supervising RLRC
that one of its members no longer occupies
his/her post. The Minister shall inform the
competent authority, and the Commissioner shall
be replaced in a period not exceeding ninety (90)
days. The appointee shall serve the remaining
period of his/her predecessor.

Section 2: Bureau
responsibilities
of
RLRC
and
its
Article 17: Composition of the Bureau
RLRC
The Bureau of RLRC shall be composed of the
Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson and the
Secretary.
Article 18: Responsibilities of the Bureau
of RLRC
The Bureau of RLRC shall have the following
responsibilities:
1° to lead activities of RLRC;
2° to prepare meetings of the Council
Commissioners;
3° to
comply
and
ensure
the
implementation of the resolutions
the Council of Commissioners;
4° to monitor relations between RLRC other
institutions.
Article 19: Responsibilities of the Chairperson
of RLRC
The Chairperson of RLRC shall have the
following responsibilities:

1° to convene and chair meetings of the
Council of the Commissioners and those
of the Bureau;
2° to supervise and coordinate activities
RLRC;
3° to represent the Commission within the
country and abroad;
4° to be the spokesperson of RLRC;
5° to transmit reports of RLRC to the
competent organs;
6° to be a signatory to all documents and
correspondences of RLRC;
7° to perform any other duties related to the
mission of RLRC as may be assigned by
the Council of Commissioners.
Article 20: Responsibilities of the Vice
Chairperson RLRC
The Vice Chairperson shall have the following
responsibilities:
1° to assist the Chairperson and deputize for
him/her in case of absence;
2° to perform any other duty related to the
mission of RLRC as may be assigned by
the Council of Commissioners.

Article 21: Responsibilities of the Secretary
of RLRC
The Secretary of RLRC shall:
1° 1act as the rapporteur of the meetings
of the Council of Commissioners;
2° be the custodian of the RLRC documents
and books of RLRC;
3° prepare activity
Commission;
the
4 ° follow up daily matters r e l a t e
especially t o s u pp o r t ser vi c e s t o
RLRC;
5° perform any other duty as may be
assigned by the Council of
Commissioners.
Section 3: Advisory
responsibilities
reports
Council
Article 22: Members of t h e
Council and their responsibilities
of
and
Advisory
The Advisory Council shall be comprised of one
member from each of the following institutions:
1° Each Chamber of the Parliament;
2° the Supreme Court;

3° the Ministry;
4° the
National
Public
Prosecution
Authority;
5° the Rwanda National Police;
6° the Office of the Ombudsman;
7° the National Commission for Human
Rights;
8° the Bar Association;
9° public universities and institutions
higher learning having a faculty of law;
10° private universities and institutions
higher learning having a faculty of law;
11° the Private Sector Federation;
12° non-governmental organizations.
Members of the Bureau of RLRC shall
members of the Advisory Council.
At least thirty percent (30%) of the members
the Advisory Council shall be females.
The Advisory Council shall be responsible for
providing guidelines for RLRC and advising it.
Article 23: Appointment of members of the
Advisory Council and their term of office
Members of the Advisory Council shall
appointed by a Presidential Order.
Members of the Advisory Council shall not
entitled to any remuneration.

Members of the Advisory Council shall
appointed for a renewable term of seven (7)
years.
The replacing member of the Advisory Council
shall complete the remaining term of office of the
person he/she is replacing
CHAPTER V: FUNCTIONING OF THE
ORGANS OF RLRC
Section One: Functioning of the Council
Commissioners
Article 24: Meetings of the Council of the
Commissioners
The meeting of the Council of Commissioners
shall meet whenever deemed necessary
presence of at least four (4) members. It shall
convened and presided over by the Chairperson
or the Vice-Chairperson in the absence of the
Chairperson at their own initiative or upon
request in writing, by at least three (3)
members.
The Council of Commissioners shall e x a m i n
items on the agenda and any other additional
ones upon request by the Chairperson or by three
(3) members.
The Council of Commissioners may invite to
meetings any person with special expertise
advise the Council.

The invitee is not allowed to vote. He/she shall
only take part in discussions on the items which
he /she was requested to advise on.
The agenda and any other documents to
discussed shall be transmitted to each member
of the Council of Commissioners at least two
(2) working days before the meeting, unless the
meeting is convened in urgent circumstances.
In case of absence of the Chairperson and the
Vice Chairperson, the elder Commissioner shall
convene the meeting of the Council
C o m m i s s i o n e r s a n d Commissioners shall
elect among themselves the chair.
In case of absence of the Commission Secretary
of RLRC, the youngest Commissioner shall act
the rapporteur.
Article 25:
minutes
Decision
making
and
Every member of the Council of Commissioners
shall have only one vote. Decisions shall be taken
on consensus and if not possible, they shall
be taken through an absolute majority vote of the
members present.
Minutes of the meeting of the Council
Commissioners shall be adopted in the next
meeting and signed by the one who chaired it and
its rapporteur.

Article 26: Consideration of reports
Items to be examined by one of the meetings
the Council of Commissioners in the first
quarter of the financial year shall include
approval of the activity and financial reports
the previous year. The said reports shall
submitted to the Minister after their adoption.
Every quarter, RLRC shall also prepare
activity report and a copy shall be submitted
the Minister.
Section 2: Functioning of the Bureau of the
RLRC
Article 27: Meetings of the Bureau of RLRC
The Bureau of RLRC shall meet whenever
deemed necessary. The meeting shall
convened and chaired by the Chairperson
RLRC.
Section 3 : Functioning of the Advisory
Council
Article 28: Meetings of the Advisory Council
The Advisory Council shall meet twice (2) a year
and whenever deemed necessary. Meeting shall
be convened and chaired by the Minister. The
Chairperson of RLRC shall act as its rapporteur.
The Advisory Council may invite to
meetings any person who has special expertise

for technical advice.
Article 29: Internal rules and regulations
RLRC shall prepare the draft internal rules and
regulations and submit it to the Council
Commissioners for approval.
It may also, through administrative directives,
institute mechanisms of managing its internal
affairs.
CHAPTER VI: STAFF AND PROPERTY OF
RLRC
Section One: Staff of the RLRC
Article 30: Preparation of the organizational
structure
The Council of Commissioners shall prepare the
organizational structure of RLRC to be approved
by a Prime Minister’s Order upon request by the
Minister.
Article 31: Staff
RLRC shall comprise both technical and
administrative staff governed in accordance with
the General Statute of Rwanda Public Service.
The technical staff of RLRC shall be comprised
of experts in law.

The support staff of RLRC shall be in charge
its day to day running.
Section 2: Property of RLRC
Article 32: Property and its sources
The property of RLRC shall be comprised of both
movable and immovable property. It shall come
from the following:
1° State budget allocations;
2° grants from Government or stakeholders;
3° incomes from services rendered
RLRC;
4° income from its property;
5° donations and bequests;
6° property that belonged to the National
Law Reform Commission established
the Organic Law n° 01/2010/OL
09/6/2010.
Article 33: Management, use and audit of the
property
The management, use and audit of the property
of RLRC shall be conducted in accordance with
relevant legal provisions.

The internal audit service of the Commission
shall submit a quarterly report to the Council
Commissioners.
Article 34: Budget of RLRC
The budget of RLRC shall be approved and
managed in accordance with the relevant legal
provisions.
CHAPTER VII: TRANSITIONAL
AND FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 35: Actions taken
commencement of this Law
before
the
Actions legally taken and legal instruments
enacted under the name of National Law Reform
Commission established by the Organic Law
01/2010/OL of 09/6/2010 shall remain valid.
Article 36: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
This law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 37: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions inconsistent with this

Law are hereby repealed.
Article 38: Commencement
This law shall come into force on the date
its publication in the Official Gazette of the
Republic of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

ORGANIC LAW Nº05/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
REPEALING THE ORGANIC LAW N° 01/2005
OF 14/02/2005 ON THE ORGANISATION
STATISTICAL ACTIVITIES IN RWANDA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
Article 2: Repealing of the Organic Law
Article 3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
Article 4: Repealing provision
Article 5: Commencement

ORGANIC LAW Nº 05/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
REPEALING THE ORGANIC LAW N° 01/2005
OF 14/02/2005 ON THE ORGANISATION
STATISTICAL ACTIVITIES IN RWANDA
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
SANCTION,
PROMULGATE
THE
FOLLOWING ORGANIC LAW AND ORDER
IT BE PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL
GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 24 May
2013;
The Senate, in its session of 05 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
94, 95, 108, 201 and 202;

Having reviewed Organic Law n° 01/2005
14/02/2005 on the organization of statistical activities
in Rwanda;
ADOPTS:
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
This Organic Law repeals the Organic Law
n°01/2005 of 14/02/2005 on the organization
statistical activities in Rwanda.
Article 2: Repealing of the Organic Law
The Organic Law n° 01/2005 of 14/02/2005 on
organization of statistical activities in Rwanda
hereby repealed.
Article 3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
This Organic Law was drafted in English, considered
and adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 4: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions contrary to this Organic
Law are hereby repealed

Article 5: Commencement
This Organic Law shall come into force on the
of its publication in the Official Gazette of
Republic of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr. HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/ Attorney General

LAW N° 45/2013 OF 16/06/2013 ON THE
ORGANISATION
OF
STATISTICAL
ACTIVITIES IN RWANDA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
HAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article one: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Definition of terms
Article 3 : Scope of application
CHAPTER
II:
STATISTICAL
FUNDAMETATAL PRINCIPLES
Article 4:Statistical data interest
Article 5: Quality of statistical data
Article 6:Characteristics of statistical data
Article 7: Publication of statistical data
CHAPTER III: COORDINATION AND
STRUCTURE
OF
THE
NATIONAL
STATISTICAL SYSTEM

Article 8: Coordination of national statistical
system
Article 10: Modalities of conducting statistical
activities by other institutions
Article 11: Approval for conducting statistical
activities
CHAPTER IV: NATIONAL STATISTICAL
PROGRAM
Article 12: National General Census
Article 13: Other types of surveys
CHAPTER V: OBLIGATION TO RESPOND
TO QUESTIONS DURING CENSUSES AND
STATISTICAL SURVEYS
Article 14: Response to survey and census
questions
Article 15: No allegation of the principle
professional secrecy
Article 16: Providing basic databases and
information
CHAPTER
VI:
CONFIDENTIALITY
Article
17:Prohibited
STATISTICAL
dissemination

information
Article 18: Making and publication of list
enterprises or establishments
Article 19: Accessibility to anonymous basic
databases
Article 20:Prohibited use of data
Article 21: Confidentiality of data obtained
from administrative services
Article 22:Taking oath of members of staff
CHAPTER VII: TRANSITIONAL AND
FIFINAL PROVISIONS
Article 23: Activities performed prior to the
commencement of this Law
Article 24:Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Law
Article 25: Repealing provision
Article 26: Commencement

LAW N° 45/2013 OF 16/06/2013 ON THE
ORGANISATION
OF
STATISTICAL
ACTIVITIES IN RWANDA
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND WE
SANCTION,
PROMULGATE
THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 24 May
2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 90, 92, 93, 94, 108,
201 and 202;
ADOPTS:

CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article one: Purpose of this Law
This Law determines the organization of statistical
activities in Rwanda.
Article 2: Definition of terms
For the purpose of this Law, the following terms
defined as follows:
1° Statistical data: data in figures that have
come out of surveys, censuses or other
forms of research, that are either analyzed
or not;
2° Survey: a technical operation that is used
order to obtain data on topics of particular
interest. The collection of the data in
framework of a survey bases itself on
drawn sample in accordance with particular
and scientific procedures. The drawing
this sample must permit the generalization
of data collected on the whole Country, City
of Kigali or the Province from where it
been drawn;
3° Census: an operation of data collection
features of the population of the whole
Country, City of Kigali or the whole
Province while proceeding to the exhaustive

counting of all people, one by one;
4° Statistics: scientific methods aiming
collecting numeric data, processing,
analyzing, publishing, safe storage, drawing
conclusions and decision making;
5° Indicators: a set of measurements made
analyzed numeric data, permitting
appreciate the state of a phenomenon or
its evolution;
6° Statistical information: the aspect of
reality expressed in numbers;
7° Visa: written authorization delivered, upon
request, by the National Institute
Statistics of Rwanda to any person
undertaking a statistical survey, attesting
that the survey respects the requirements,
either at the level of its organization or at
level of publication of data that have come
out of it.
Article 3 : Scope of application
The key domains covered by this Law include
among others:
1° demographic
and
social
data
of

population;
2° cultural data;
3° economic, financial and commercial data;
4° data concerning agriculture, livestock
environment;
5° judicial data.
CHAPTER
II:
STATISTICAL
FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
Article 4: Statistical data interest
Data and indicators established from statistics must
be used as a basis for general planning
evaluation of the development strategies in
sectors of the national life. Statistical data also
provide a basis for the development of research
based on objective data and indicators.
Article 5: Quality of statistical data
The quality of statistical information is characterised
by:
1° relevance;
2° comparability;

3° accuracy;
4° reliability;
5° punctuality;
6° frequency;
7° promptness;
8° accessibility;
9° indication of all the necessary requirements
that enable the users of the data to trust
value.
Article 6: Characteristics of statistical data
Statistical data must be characterised by
objectivity and professionalism of the institution
produced it.
Article 7: Publication of statistical data
Statistical data should be published and made
available to all users in the simplest manner. They
must not be in contradiction with each other
partial.

CHAPTER III : COORDINATION AND
STRUCTURE
OF
THE
NATIONAL
STATISTICAL SYSTEM
Article 8: Coordination of national statistical
system
The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda shall
be responsible for the coordination of the national
statistical system.
The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda shall
be the only competent institution empowered
officially provide all users with statistical data
information, whether those it published or those
which have its visa, to approve the appropriate
methods for the conception, collection, processing,
analysis, storage, publication and dissemination
statistical information for only statistical purposes
and to confirm the timing and the format
publication of such statistics
.
Data and information that are not yet officially
published shall not be given to anybody without
visa of the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.
However, the Institute may delegate part of
prerogatives on this matter to some services
belonging to the national statistical system.

Article 9: Components of national statistical
system
The national statistical system is made up of five
main components:
1° the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda;
2° various State institutions that provide statistical
information. Such statistical data constitute
official statistics;
3° organas which use statistical information;
4° organs that provide statistical information,
including public and private institutions, non-
governmental organisations, households and
population;
5° institutions of research and training including
institutions of higher learning.
Article 10: Modalities of conducting statistical
activities by other institutions
The statistical services of the public administration
and those of public institutions may, in their
individual capacities, conduct statistical activities,

process, and analyse them in accordance with their
needs, with exception of surveys at the level of
whole country, City of Kigali or the whole province.
This shall be done in conformity with the norms
methodologies agreed upon between such services
and the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.
These services shall have the responsibility
provide the National Institute of Statistics
Rwanda with all statistical data that they possess.
Before the annual statistical reports of such services
are published, they shall possess the visa of
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda
Article 11: Approval for conducting statistical
activities
Any person who wishes to conduct statistical
surveys on a national scale or covering at least
whole Province or City of Kigali and which
beyond the usual activities of which they
permitted to conduct, they shall obtain the prior
approval of the National Institute of Statistics
Rwanda, whether on the necessity of such surveys
and methodologies that shall be used.
The
questionnaires that will be used in such surveys shall
bear the official visa of the Institute.

CHAPTER IV: NATIONAL STATISTICAL
PROGRAM
Article 12: National General Census
The National General Census shall be organised at
least once in every ten (10) years.
All components of the National Statistical System
are required to provide assistance to the activities
the National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda in
manner determined by relevant laws.
Article 13: Other types of surveys
Nationwide surveys, or surveys covering City
Kigali or a whole Province conducted by any person
that were not provided for in the national statistical
program, shall require prior approval of the National
Institute of Statistics of Rwanda with respect to
necessity of their conduct and to the methodologies
that should be used.
The surveys are subject to an authorisation request
least two (2) months before they are conducted. If
goes beyond one month without response from
time of the request, it is presumed as if the National
Institute of Statistics of Rwanda has accepted
they shall begin to conduct the survey. If
Institute has accepted, the questionnaires shall bear
the visa of the Institute.

CHAPTER V: OBLIGATION TO RESPOND
TO QUESTIONS DURING CENSUSES AND
STATISTICAL SURVEYS
Article 14: Response to survey and census
questions
Upon the request of a commissioned officer,
person or legal entity is required to respond
accurately and within the specified time limits,
questions asked during national censuses and other
statistical surveys subject to prior approval by
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda.
Article 15: No allegation of the principle
professional secrecy
A person being questioned during approved surveys
shall not whatsoever invoke the principle
professional secrecy so as to refuse to give responses
to questions asked.
Article 16:
information
Providing
basic
database
and
All institutions belonging to the national statistical
system are required to provide all the basic database
in their keeping to the National Institute of Statistics
of Rwanda if it requests so and the information
related to individuals held by such institutions
which shall be accessible by the Institute.

These institutions shall at all times submit to
National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda as
institute responsible for collecting all the national
statistical information, analysis reports of surveys
conducted, as well as other statistical reports which
are produced periodically.
The National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda shall
confidentially utilize the information given to it
provided for by this Law.
CHAPTER
VI:
CONFIDENTIALITY
STATISTICAL
Article
17:Prohibited
information
It is prohibited to every employee of a statistics
service to disseminate information related to
enterprise or an establishment and an individual
or she may know in the course of performance of
or her duties or in relation to his or
responsibilities.
Data collected by the institutions of the national
statistical system through surveys or any other
method of collection are protected by statistical
confidentiality. Statistical confidentiality implies
that the dissemination of such data as well
statistical information which can be calculated from
them, shall be conducted in a way that those who
provided it are not identified whether directly
indirectly.
dissemination

Statistical confidentiality does not apply
information about an institution that has already
been published to the public or to information of
enterprise or establishment which it accepts,
writing, to be published.
Statistical data in monopoly may be published
except those concerning the cost of production
profits.
Article 18: Making and publication of list
enterprises or establishments
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 17
this Law, the National Institute of Statistics
Rwanda has powers to make and publish each year
or when necessary, a list of enterprises
establishments which indicates the following: name,
address, type of activity, number of employees
legal status.
Article 19: Accessibility to anonymous basic
database not to be published
The anonymous basic databases on individuals
other institutions shall be accessible to researchers
who, however, shall be committed to :
1° make a written note, that they shall
communicate to any person the contents
such databases without the written

authorization of the National Institute
Statistics of Rwanda;
2° give to the National Institute of Statistics
Rwanda, the findings of their research.
Article 20: Prohibited use of data
Data related to an organ, institution and individual
shall not whatsoever be used for tax control
purposes, for economic repression or for legal
investigations by judicial organs.
Article 21: Confidentiality of data obtained from
administrative services
Legal
provisions
concerning
statistical
confidentiality shall equally apply to data obtained
from administrative sources.
Article 22:Taking oath of staff members
Before taking office, members of staff of
institutions of the national statistical system shall
take oath before the Minister in charge of general
statistics or his/her representative, that they shall
never reveal the statistical confidentiality related
individuals as defined in this Law, learned in
course of performance of their duties or in relation
their responsibilities.

CHAPTER VII: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL
PROVISIONS
Article 23: Activities performed prior to
commencement of this Law
All activities legally performed pursuant to Organic
Law n° 01/2005 of 14/02/2005 on the organisation
of statistical activities in Rwanda before
publication of this Law in the Official Gazette of
Republic of Rwanda shall remain valid.
Article 24: Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Law
This Law was drafted in English, considered
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 25: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions contrary to this Law
hereby repealed.
Article 26: Commencement
This Law comes into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2016

(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr. HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/ Attorney General

ORGANIC LAW Nº 06/2013/OL OF
16/06/2013 REPEALING ORGANIC LAW
Nº 53/2008 of 02/09/2008 ESTABLISHING
RWANDA DEVELOPMENT BOARD (RDB)
AND
DETERMINING
ITS
RESPONSIBILITIES, ORGANISATION AND
FUNCTIONING AS MODIFIED AND
COMPLEMENTED TO DATE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
Article 2: Repealing of the Organic Law
Article 3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Organic Law
Article 4: Repealing provision
Article 5: Commencement

ORGANIC LAW Nº 06/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
REPEALING ORGANIC LAW Nº53/2008
02/09/2008
ESTABLISHING
RWANDA
DEVELOPMENT
BOARD
(RDB)
AND
DETERMINING ITS RESPONSIBILITIES,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
MODIFIED AND COMPLEMENTED TO DATE
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND WE
SANCTION,
PROMULGATE
THE
FOLLOWING ORGANIC LAW AND ORDER
IT BE PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL
GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 23 May
2013;
The Senate, in its session of 6 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90,92,
94, 95, 108, 201 and 202;

Having reviewed Organic Law n° 53/2008
02/09/2008 establishing Rwanda Development Board
(RDB) and determining its responsibilities,
organisation and functioning as modified
complemented to date;
ADOPTS:
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
This Organic Law repeals the Organic Law
n°53/2008 of 02/09/2008 establishing Rwanda
Development Board (RDB) and determining
responsibilities, organization and functioning
modified and complemented to date.
Article 2: Repealing of the Organic Law
The Organic Law n°53/2008 of 02/09/2008
establishing Rwanda Development Board (RDB)
determining its responsibilities, organization
functioning as modified and complemented to date
hereby repealed.
Article 3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
This Organic Law was drafted in English, considered
and adopted in Kinyarwanda.

Article 4: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions contrary to this Organic
Law are hereby repealed
Article 5: Commencement
This Organic Law shall come into force on the date
of its publication in the Official Gazette of
Republic of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr. HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/ Attorney General

LAW
N o
46/2013
OF
16/06/2013
ESTABLISHING
RWANDA
DEVELOPMENT BOARD (RDB) AND
DETERMINING
ITS
MISSION,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article one: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Independence and autonomy of
RDB
Article 3: Head office of RDB
CHAPTER II: MISSION OF RDB
Article 4: Missions of RDB
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF RDB
Article 5: Supervising authority of RDB and
the performance contract
Article 6: Contents of the performance
contract
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF RDB
AND

Article 7: Management organs of RDB
Section one: Board of Directors
Article 8: Board of Directors of RDB
Article 09: Appointment of members of the
Board of Directors
Article 10: Responsibilities of the Board of
Directors
Article 11: Convening and holding meetings
the Board of Directors
Article 12: Provisions of RDB’s internal rules
and regulations
Article 13: Notification that a member of the
Board of Directors has personal interest
issues under consideration
Article 14: Invitation of other persons to the
Board of Directors meeting
Article 15: Resolutions of the Board
Directors meetings
Article 16: Sitting allowances for members
the Board of Directors
Article 17: Incompatibilities with membership
of the Board of Directors
Article
18:
Reasons
for
termination

membership in the Board of Directors
Section 2: Senior Management
Article 19: Members
Management of RDB
of
the
Senior
Article 20: Responsibilities of the Senior
Management of RDB
Article 21: Appointment and removal of the
Chief Executive Officer of RDB and other
members of the Senior management
Article 22: Replacement of the Chief Executive
Officer in case of his/her absence
Article 23: Responsibilities of the Chief
Executive Officer of RDB
Article 24: Performance contract
Article 25: Benefits allocated to the Senior
Management and staff of RDB
CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 26: Property of RDB and its sources
Article 27: Transfer of property

Article 28: Use, management and audit of the
patrimony
Article 29: Approval and management of the
Budget of RDB
Article 30: Annual financial report
CHAPTER VI: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 31: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
Article 32: Repealing provision
Article 33: Commencement

LAW
N o
46/2013
OF
16/06/2013
ESTABLISHING
RWANDA
DEVELOPMENT BOARD (RDB) AND
DETERMINING
ITS
MISSION,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
June 2013;
The Senate, in its session of 06 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
93, 94, 95, 108, 113, 118, 176, 183, 201 and 202;

ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
This Law establishes “Rwanda Development
Board”, abbreviated as RDB, in English. This
Law also determines its mission, organization and
functioning.
Article 2: Independence and autonomy of RDB
RDB shall have a legal personality, administrative
and financial autonomy and shall be governed
accordance with the provisions of this Law.
Article 3: Head office of RDB
The Head Office of RDB is located in Kigali City,
the Capital of the Republic of Rwanda. It may
transferred elsewhere in Rwanda if deemed
necessary.
RDB may have branches elsewhere in the Country
and abroad if deemed necessary, in order to fulfill
its mission, by an Order of the Prime Minister.

CHAPTER II: MISSION OF RDB
Article 4 : Missions of RDB
The main missions of RDB shall be:
1° to fast track development activities and
facilitate the Government and private
sector to undertake an active role;
2° to promote local and foreign direct
investments in Rwanda ;
3° to promote exports to regional and
international markets of goods and
services with added value;
4° to participate in
initiating and
implementing policies and strategies
matters relating to tourism and
conservation of national parks and other
protected areas in matters relating
tourism, and advise the Government
the promotion of the tourism sector;
5° to
participate
in
initiating
and
implementing policies and strategies
the
field
of
Information
and
Communication Technology and advise
the Government on the promotion of the
sector;
6° to provide guidelines, analyze project

proposals
and
follow
up
the
implementation of Government decisions
in line with public and private
investments;
7° to carry out privatization programs,
monitor them and advise the Government
accordingly ;
8° to promote entrepreneurship and support
the creation and development of private
enterprises ;
9° to initiate, implement and follow up the
activities relating to modernization,
harnessing partnership and registering
trading companies and businesses,
secured transactions, intellectual property
rights and the rights to initiate, exercise
and cause business activities cessation;
10° to promote investment in capacity building
and mobilize private sector for employees’
skills development programs in order
improve efficiency and competitiveness;
11° to facilitate and help investors meet
environmental standards;

12° to cooperate and collaborate with other
regional and international institutions
having similar missions ;
13° to advise Government on all activities
which can fast track development
Rwanda.
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF RDB
Article 5: Supervising authority of RDB and
the performance contract
RDB shall be supervised by the Office of the
President.
The Ministry in charge of commerce shall ensure
the smooth running of technical and
administrative matters. There shall be concluded
between the afore mentioned Ministry and the
Board of Directors a performance contract
determining
competences,
rights
and
responsibilities of each party in achieving the
mission of RDB.
This contract shall have a duration equivalent
the term of office of the members of the Board
Directors and be signed by the Chairperson of the
Board of Directors and the Minister in charge
commerce.

Article 6:
contract
Contents of
the performance
Among the contents of the contract mentioned
Article 5 of this Law that should be provided for
in a clear way shall be:
1° the responsibilities of the Board
Directors and the management as well
those of the main organs of RDB;
2° expected results of RDB;
3° the sources of the property of RDB,
use and permanent audit procedures.
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF RDB
Article 7: Management organs of RDB
AND
RDB shall be comprised of the following two (2)
management organs:
1° the Board of Directors;
2° Senior Management;
An Order of the Prime Minister may establish
other necessary organs for RDB to fulfill
mission.

Section One: Board of Directors
Article 8: Board of Directors of RDB
The Board of Directors of RDB shall be the
supreme governing organ. It shall have full
powers and responsibilities to manage RDB
resources in order for it to fulfill its mission.
Article 9: Appointment of members of the
Board of Directors
The Board of Directors shall consist of nine (9)
members, including the Chief Executive Officer
who is also the rapporteur of meetings of the
Board of Directors and eight (8) members
appointed by a Presidential Order and also
determining the
Chairperson
and Vice
Chairperson.
At least thirty per cent (30 %) of the members
the Board of Directors shall be females.
Members of Board of Directors shall be selected
from Rwandans or foreigners with extensive
knowledge and experience in matters related
development. They shall serve for a term of office
of five (5) years renewable only once.
Article 10 : Responsibilities of the Board
Directors
The responsibilities of the Board of Directors

RDB shall be the following:
1° to determine the strategic vision and the plan
of action of RDB and follow up their
implementation;
2° to approve the internal rules and regulations
of RDB;
3° to approve the draft of organizational
structure of RDB which shall be established
by a Prime Minister’s Order;
4° to approve the annual budget proposal before
it is transmitted to relevant authorities;
5° to evaluate the performance of RDB
accordance with the plan of action and the
budget;
6° to approve the activity and financial reports
of the previous year;
7° to appoint and dismiss the personnel of RDB
other than members of the Senior
Management listed in Article 19 of this Law;
8° to monitor the performance of the
management and personnel of RDB;
9° to submit the activity report to the President
of the Republic on a quarterly basis and when
deemed necessary, with a copy to the
Ministry in charge of trade.

Article 11: Convening and holding meetings
the Board of Directors
The meeting of the Board of Directors of RDB
shall be held once every quarter and at any time
is deemed necessary upon invitation of the
Chairperson or the Vice Chairperson, in case
absence of its Chairperson, at their own initiative,
or upon proposal in writing by a third (1/3) of
members. The invitation shall be submitted
writing to the members of the Board of Directors
at least five (5) days before the meeting is held.
However, the extraordinary meeting shall
convened in writing at least three (3) days before
the meeting is held.
Every quarter, the Board of Directors shall
examine the financial and activities reports of the
previous quarter which shall be transmitted to the
President’s Office, with a copy to the Minister
charge of trade.
Article 12: Provisions of RDB’s internal rules
and regulations
There shall be included the following provisions
in the rules and regulations of RDB:
1° designation of the person who convenes and
presides over the Board of Director meetings
in case of absence of the Chairperson and the
Vice Chairperson;

2° modalities on how the meetings are held and
how decisions are taken;
3° modalities on how a member of the Board
Directors shall inform of his/ her private
interests in the items under examination or
be examined soon and penalties he/she may
be imposed upon by a competent organ
accordance with Article 13 of this Law.
Article 13: Notification that a member of the
Board of Directors has personal interest
issues under consideration
When a member of the Board of Directors has
direct or indirect personal interest in the issues
under consideration or to be considered soon,
he/she shall be required, as soon as he/she
informed of the agenda, to immediately inform the
Board of Directors of the basis of his/her interests.
A person who notifies about his/her interest on the
issue under consideration shall not vote during
decision making on such an issue. Members
RDB Board of Directors do not attend meetings
where the decisions to be made affect them.
When the majority or all of the Board members
have direct or indirect interests, in matters being
discussed or to be discussed, to the extent that
decision cannot be taken, the issues shall
forwarded to the organ supervising RDB.

Article 14: Invitation of other persons to the
Board of Directors meeting
The Board of Directors may invite in its meeting
any person from whom it may seek advice on
certain issue on the agenda. The invited person
shall not be allowed to vote and follow the
debates of other items on the agenda.
Article 15: Resolutions of the Board
Directors meetings
Resolutions of the Board of Directors meeting
shall be signed by its members immediately at
completion and shall be submitted to the
President’s Office in a period not exceeding five
(5) days, with a copy to the Ministry in charge
trade and other concerned Ministries.
Article 16: Sitting allowances for members
the Board of Directors
Members of the Board of Directors who are
present in the meeting of the Board of Directors
shall be entitled to sitting allowances determined
by a Presidential Order.

Article 17: Incompatibilities with membership
of the Board of Directors
With exception of the Chief Executive Officer,
other members of the Board of Directors shall not
be allowed to conduct any remunerated activity
RDB.
Members of the Board of Directors or companies
in which they hold shares shall not be allowed
bid for RDB tenders.
Article 18: Reasons for termination
membership from the Board of Directors
A member of the Board of Directors shall vacate
his/ her office if:
1° his/her term of office expires;
2° he / she resigns in writing;
3° he / she is no longer able to perform his
her duties due to a physical or mental
disability certified by an authorized
medical doctor;
4° he / she is definitively sentenced to a term
of imprisonment equal to or exceeding six
(6) months without suspension;
5° he / she is absent from three (3)
consecutive meetings in one year with
justified reasons;

6° he / she no longer fulfills the requirements
considered at the time of his or her
appointment in the Board of Directors;
7° he / she demonstrates behaviors contrary
to his or her responsibilities;
8° he / she jeopardizes the interests of RDB;
9° he/she is convicted of the crime
genocide or genocide ideology;
10° he / she dies.
In case one of the members of the Board
Directors leaves his/ her duties before the
expiration of his / her term of office, the
competent authorities shall appoint his or her
replacement. The appointee shall complete the
remaining term of office.
A Board member may resign from his / her duties
by informing in writing the nominating authority.
The decision shall be taken in a period not
exceeding one (1) month from receipt of the
resignation letter. Upon expiry of that period
without a response, the resignation shall
presumed definitively approved.
Section 2: Senior Management
Article 19: Members
Management of RDB
of
the
Senior
The Senior Management of RDB shall comprise

the following:
1° the Chief Executive Officer;
2° the Chief Operating Officer;
3° the Chief Financial Officer;
4° Heads of departements.
The term of office of the Chief Executive Officer
of RDB shall be five (5) years. She or he shall not
be allowed to serve for more than two (2)
consecutive terms.
The term of office of other members of the Senior
Management shall be five (5) years which may
renewed in accordance with the capacity
demonstrated.
Article 20: Responsibilities of the Senior
Management of RDB
The responsabilities of the Senior Management
RDB shall be the following:
1°
to prepare and coordinate the activities
RDB;
2°
to review documents to be examined by the
Board of Directors of RDB;
to implement
Directors;
3°
decisions of the Board

4°
to carry out any activities that may promote
RDB.
Article 21: Appointment and removal of the
Chief Executive Officer of RDB and other
members of the Senior management
The Chief Executive Officer of RDB shall
appointed and removed from office by
Presidential Order.
Other members of the Senior Management shall
be appointed and removed from office by
Order of the Prime Minister.
Article 22: Replacement of the Chief Executive
Officer in case of his/her absence
In case of the absence of the Chief Executive
Officer, he / she shall be replaced by the Chief
Operating Officer.
Article 23: Responsibilities of the Chief
Executive Officer of RDB
The Chief Executive Officer of RDB shall be the
following responsibilities:
1° to coordinate the activities of RDB;
2° to ensure the effective management
RDB;
3° to organise the organisational services
RDB;
4° to represent RDB before the law and

make public its activities;
5° to implement the decisions and
regulations as assigned to him/her
superior organs;
6° to submit a report on the activities and
management of RDB;
7° any other activities that may be assigned
to him/her by the Board of Directors.
Article 24: Performance contract
Members of Senior Management of RDB shall
supervised by the Chief Executive Officer and
required to submit to him / her the activity report
every month and at any time it is considered
necessary.
There shall be concluded between the Chief
Executive Officer and the Board of Directors
RDB a performance contract indicating at least
the responsibilities of each party and the
necessary requirements for RDB to fulfill
mission.
There shall be concluded between the Chief
Executive Officer and other members of Senior
Management of RDB a performance contract
relating to the plan of action indicating at least the
responsibilities of each party and the necessary
requirements for RDB to fulfill its mission.

Article 25: Benefits allocated to the Senior
Management and staff of RDB
Benefits to be allocated to the members of the
Senior Management of RDB shall be determined
by a Presidential Order.
Benefits of other staff of RDB shall be determined
in accordance with the General Statute for
Rwanda Public Service.
The Board of Directors shall suggest the Cabinet
to approve additional performance-based benefits
to be allocated to the Senior Management
members and other staff of RDB.
CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 26: Property of RDB and its sources
The property of RDB shall comprise movables
and immovables.
It shall come from the following:
1°
the State budget allocations;
2°
State or partners subsidies;
income from rendered services;
3°

4°
5°
loans extended to RDB, approved by the
Minister in charge of finance;
donations and bequests.
6°
income from its property;
Article 27: Transfer of property
Movable and immovable property, liabilities and
the denominations of RDB as determined by the
Organic Law nº 53/2008 of 02/09/2008
establishing the Rwanda Development Board
(RDB) and determining its responsibilities,
organization and functioning are hereby
transferred to RDB established by this Law.
Article 28: Use, management and audit of the
property
The use, management and audit of the property
RDB shall be carried out in accordance with
relevant legal provisions. RDB internal audit
service shall submit a report to the Board
Directors.
Article 29: Approval and management of the
Budget of RDB
The budget of RDB shall be approved and
managed in accordance with relevant legal
provisions.

Article 30: Annual financial report
Within three (3) months following the closure
the financial year, the Chief Executive Officer
RDB shall submit the annual financial report
the Office of the President after its approval
the Board of Directors in accordance with laws
governing management of State finance and
property, with a copy to the Ministry supervising
the activities of RDB in administration and
technical issues.
CHAPTER VI: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 31: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
This Law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 32: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions contrary to this Law are
hereby repealed.
Article 33: Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.

Kigali, on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

ORGANIC LAW N o 07/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
REPEALING ORGANIC LAW N° 05/2005
14/04/2005
ESTABLISHING
INDEPENDENT NATIONAL COMMISSION
RESPONSIBLE FOR COLLECTION
EVIDENCE INDICATING THE ROLE OF
FRENCH STATE IN THE GENOCIDE THAT
WAS PERPETRATED IN RWANDA IN 1994
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
Article 2 : Repealing of the Organic Law
Article 3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
Article 4: Repealing provision
Article 5: Commencement

ORGANIC LAW N 0 07/2013/OL OF 16/06/2013
REPEALING ORGANIC LAW N° 05/2005
OF
14/04/2005
ESTABLISHING
INDEPENDENT NATIONAL COMMISSION
RESPONSIBLE FOR COLLECTION
EVIDENCE INDICATING THE ROLE
THE FRENCH STATE IN THE GENOCIDE
THAT WAS PERPETRATED IN RWANDA
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING ORGANIC LAW AND ORDER
IT BE PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL
GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC
RWANDA.
THE PARLIARMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 14 June
2013;
The Senate, in its session of 14 June 2013;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda as amended to date, especially in Articles
62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90,92, 93, 94, 95, 108, 201

202;
Having reviewed Organic Law n° 05/2005
14/04/2005 establishing an Independent National
Commission responsible for collection of evidence
indicating the role of the French State in
genocide that was perpetrated in Rwanda in 1994;
ADOPTS:
Article One: Purpose of this Organic Law
This Organic Law repeals Organic Law n° 05/2005
of 14/04/2005 establishing an Independent
National Commission responsible for collection
evidence indicating the role of the French State
the genocide that was perpetrated in Rwanda
1994.
Article 2 : Repealing of the Organic Law
Organic Law n° 05/2005 of 14/04/2005
establishing an Independent National Commission
responsible for collection of evidence indicating
the role of the French State in the genocide
was perpetrated in Rwanda in 1994 is repealed.

Article 3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Organic Law
This Organic Law was drafted, considered
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 4: Repealing provision
All prior legal provisions inconsistent with
Organic Law are hereby repealed.
Article 5: Commencement
This Organic Law shall come into force on the date
of its publication in the Official Gazette of
Republic of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 16/06/2013

(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

LAW N° 08/2013/OL OF
MODIFYING
AND
ORGANIC LAW
31/2007 OF 25/07/2007 RELATING TO
ABOLITION OF THE DEATH
AS
MODIFIED
AND
TO DATE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
One: Crimes and corresponding
Article 2: Exemption from life imprisonment
with special provisions
3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
4: Repealing provision
5: Commencement

LAW N° 08/2013/OL OF
MODIFYING
AND
ORGANIC LAW
31/2007 OF 25/07/2007 RELATING TO
ABOLITION OF THE DEATH
AS
MODIFIED
AND
TO DATE
KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
ORGANIC LAW AND
IT BE PUBLISHED IN THE
GAZETTE
OF
THE
OF RWANDA
PARLIAMENT:
Chamber of Deputies, in its session of 12
2013;
Senate, in its session of 10 June 2013;
to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
in Articles 10, 12, 20, 62, 66, 67, 88,

90, 92, 93, 94, 95, 108 and 201;
to the Organic Law n° 01/2012/OL of
instituting the Penal Code;
reviewed Organic Law n° 31/2007 of
relating to the abolition of the Death
especially in Article 5;
One: Crimes and corresponding
5 of the Organic Law nº 31/2007 of
relating to the abolition of the death
is modified and complemented as follows:
following offenses shall be punishable by
imprisonment with special provisions:
having
resulted
1° torture
2° murder
or
other
killing
with
dehumanizing acts on the dead body;
3° crimes of genocide and crimes against
humanity;
in
death;

4° acts of terrorism resulting in the death of
a person;
5° child defilement by a person having authority
over the child;
6° Child defilement resulting in death or an
incurable illness;
7° sexual tortures.
Other offences punishable by life imprisonment
shall, in case of recidivism, be punishable by life
imprisonment with special provision.”
Ingingo ya 2: Exemption from
imprisonment with special provisions
Organic Law nº 31/2007 of 25/07/2007 relating to
the abolition of the death penalty as modified and
complemented is complemented by Article 5 bis
worded as follows:
5 bis: Exemption from
with special provisions
accused who is convicted in a case transferred to
from the International Criminal Tribunal
Rwanda or from another State shall not be
to life imprisonment with special
life
life
3: Drafting, consideration and adoption
this Organic Law
Organic Law was drafted, considered and
in Kinyarwanda.

4: Repealing provision
prior legal provisions contrary to this Organic
are hereby repealed.
5: Commencement
Organic Law shall come into force on the
of its publication in the Official Gazette of
Republic of Rwanda.
on 16/06/2013
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr HABUMUREMYI Pierre Damien
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice/Attorney General