rushinzwe imfungwa n‟abagororwa
and organisation of Rwanda
et organisation du Service
iterambere ry‟ubuhinzi n‟ubworozi
n‟imikorere byacyo……………………………………….48
Board (RAB) and determining
Rwandais de Développement
fonctionnement…………………………………………….48
gishinzwe guteza imbere
(NAEB) rikanagena inshingano,
Export Development Board
and functioning……………………………………………67
National de Développement
son organisation et son
ivugurura ry‟ingingo z‟amasezerano
of the amendments of
des modifications aux

burundu Amasezerano yashyiriweho
ahindura Amasezerano yashyiriweho
hagati ya Repubulika y‟u Rwanda
kwirinda forode n‟ihisha ry‟imisoro
of the Protocol signed in Brussels,
in Kigali, in Rwanda on
Kingdom of Belgium for the avoidance
evasion with respect to taxes
du Protocole signé à Bruxelles
à Kigali au Rwanda le 16 Avril
pour éviter la double
en mati è re d‟imp ô ts sur les revenus
burundu Amasezerano y‟inguzanyo
kuwa 24 Nzeri 2010, hagati
Amajyambere y‟Ubukungu
na miliyoni enye n‟ibihumbi
Dk) agenewe Umushinga
of the Loan Agreement Nº 815
the Republic of Rwanda and
to the loan of four million
Expansion and Development
de l‟Accord de prêt Nº 815 signé
du Rwanda et le Fonds
prêt de quatre millions cent mille
et d‟Extension du Centre

LAW N° 34/2010 OF 12/11/2010 ON THE
ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONING AND
ORGANISATION
OF
RWANDA
CORRECTIONAL SERVICE (RCS)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE ONE: ESTABLISHMENT OF RCS,
ORGANISATION AND RESPONSIBILITIES
OF ITS ORGANS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL
PROVISIONS
Article One: Establishment of the RCS
Article 2 : Supervising authority of the RCS
Article 3: Definition of terms
CHAPTER II: MISSION OF
RCS
Article 4: Responsibilities of RCS
CHAPTER III: ORGANIZATION
RESPONSIBILITIES
OF
MANAGEMENT
AND
RCS
Section One : Organization and responsibilities
of RCS management

Article 5: Management bodies
Section One: High Council
Article 6: Responsibilities of the High
Council
Article 7: Members of the High Council
Article 8: Functioning of the High Council
Sub-section 2: High Commission
Article 9: Executive Authority of RCS
Article 10: Responsibilities of the High
Commission
Article 11: Composition of the High
Commission
Article 12: Responsibilities of
RCS Commissioner General
Article 13: Responsibilities of
RCS Deputy Commissioner General
.
Section 2: Organization and responsibilities
RCS organs
Article 14: Organisation
employees’ responsibilities
of
organs
and

Article 15: Salaries
TITLE II: PRISONS
MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER ONE: PRISONS
Article 16: Prison establishment
Article 17: Prison security
CHAPTER II: PRISON MANAGEMENT
Article 18: Management of prison
Article 19: Surveillance of incarcerated
people
Article 20: Prosecuting offences committed
prison
Article 21: Prevention of escape
Article 22: Use of force
Article 23: Use of firearms
Article 24: Search
Article 25: Files of incarcerated persons
Article 26: Inspection of prisons
Article 27: Prison visits
AND
PRISON

TITLE III: DETENTION, RELEASE, AND
EXECUTION OF TIG
CHAPTER
RELEASE
ONE:
DETENTION
AND
Section One: Rights and obligations of
incarcerated person
Article 28: Admission into prison
Article 29: Detention near the family
Article 30: Acts prohibited
incarcerated person
Article 31: Categorisation
Article 32: Respect of gender in prisons
Article 33: Rights of a child who stays with
his/her incarcerated mother
Article 34: Uniform of detainees and
prisoners
Article 35: Standards required for prisons
Article 36: Rations for incarcerated persons
against

Article 37: Sports and entertainment
Article 38: Religious activities in prison
Article 39: Health care for incarcerated
persons
Article 40: Visits
Article 41: Written correspondence
Article 42: Right to go out of prison
Article 43: Income from activities
performed by incarcerated persons
Article 44: Management of money
incarcerated person earns from work
Article 45: Work of an incarcerated person
Article 46: Books and media
Article 47: Conduct in prison
Article 48: Protection of an incarcerated
person’s rights
Article 49: An incarcerated foreigner
Article 50: Main obligations of an

incarcerated person
Section 2: Release
Article 51: Releasing an incarcerated
person
Article 52: Other conditions for release
of an incarcerated person
Article 53: Procedures in releasing an
incarcerated person
Article 54: Death of an incarcerated
person
CHAPTER II : EXECUTION OF TIG
Article 55: Execution of TIG
Article 56: Rights of a person under TIG
Article 57: Detention of a person under
TIG
CHAPTER III: CORRECTIVE
EDUCATION
Article 58: Partnership in corrective
education
Article 59: Main considerations in
education

TITLE IV: PROPERTY AND FINANCING
OF RCS
Article 60: Source of RCS property
Article 61: Transfer of property
Article 62: Use, management and audit of
the property
TITLE V: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL
PROVISIONS
CHAPTER ONE: TRANSITIONAL
PROVISIONS
Article 63: Former employees of merged
institutions
Article 64: Transitional period
CHAPTER II: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 65: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
Article 66: Repealing provision
Article 67: Commencement

LAW N°34/2010 OF 12/11/2010 ON THE
ESTABLISHMENT, FUNCTIONING AND
ORGANISATION
OF
RWANDA
CORRECTIONAL SERVICE (RCS)
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
February 2010;
The Senate, in its session of 12 February 2010;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003, as amended to date,
especially in Articles 9, 10, 15, 17, 18, 19, 62, 66,
67, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 95, 108, 169 and 201;
Pursuant to the Universal Declaration of Human

Rights of December 10, 1948 to which Rwanda
adhered on September 18, 1962, especially
Article 9;
Pursuant to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights of December 16, 1966
which Rwanda adhered by Decree Law n° 8/75
February 12, 1975, especially in Article 10;
Pursuant to the African Charter on Human and
Peoples‟Rights of June 27, 1981 as ratified by the
Law n° 10/1983 of May 17, 1983 especially
Articles 1,2,3,4,5,6 and 7;
Pursuant to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child of November 20, 1989 ratified
Presidential Order n° 773/16 of September 19,
1990, especially in Article 37;
Pursuant to Organic Law n° 16/2004 of June 19,
2004 establishing the organisation, competence
and functioning of Gacaca Courts charged with
prosecuting and trying the perpetrators of the
crime of genocide and other crimes against
humanity, committed between October 1st, 1990
and December 31, 1994 as modified and
complemented to date, especially in Articles 73,
74, 78 and 80;
Pursuant to Decree Law n° 21/77 of August 18,
1977 establishing the Penal Code, as modified and
complemented to date, especially in Articles 39,

40 and 41;
Pursuant to Law n° 22/2002 of 09/07/2002 on
General Statutes for Rwanda Public Service;
Pursuant to Law n°13/2004 of May 17, 2004
relating to the Code of Criminal Procedure
modified and complemented to date;
Pursuant to Law n°13/2009 of May 27, 2009
establishing the Labor Code, especially
Articles 14 and 15;
Having reviewed Law n° 38/2006 of September
25, 2006 establishing and determining the
organisation of the National Prisons Service;
ADOPTS:
TITLE
ONE:
ESTABLISHMENT,
ORGANIZATION AND
RESPONSIBILITIES OF RCS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL
PROVISIONS
Article One: Establishment of RCS
The Rwanda Correctional Service is hereby
created and hereafter referred to as “RCS”.

The Head Office of RCS shall be located in Kigali
City, the Capital City of the Republic of Rwanda.
It may be transferred elsewhere in Rwanda
deemed necessary.
RCS has administrative and financial autonomy.
Article 2 : Supervising Authority of RCS
RCS shall be supervised by the Ministry in charge
of detainees and prisoners.
Article 3: Definition of terms
For the purpose of this Law, the following terms
are defined as follows:
1° “prison”: a place established by
Presidential Order where persons are
incarcerated following a court decision;
2° “prison guard”: professional employee
the RCS charged with prison security;
3° “imprison”: to keep a person in prison
following a court decision;
4° “alternative penalty to imprisonment”:
penalty
given to a person definitively
sentenced to imprisonment by a court
decision consisting of uncompensated public
labor, referred to by its French acronym
“TIG”;

5° “prisoner”: a person serving a sentence
prison or by performing TIG following
court final decision;
6° “detainee”: any person incarcerated
accordance with a court decision but who has
not been tried and sentenced;
7° “Commissioner
Director of RCS;
Chief
8° “Minister”: the Minister in charge
detainees and prisoners;
“Inspector”: any person given the
responsibility to supervise various prison
activities or TIG camps in accordance with
the law.
General”:
the
9°
CHAPTER II: RESPONSIBILITIES ON OF
RCS
Article 4: Responsibilities of RCS
The main responsibilities of RCS are as follows:
1° to implement the general policy for the
management of detainees and prisoners;
2° to respect the rights of detainees and
prisoners in accordance with the law;

3° to ensure the security of every detainee and
prisoner until the completion of his/her
sentence;
4° to respect the life, physical and moral
integrity and well-being of detainees and
prisoners;
5° to implement effective strategies to enable
detainees and prisoners to repent and change
their mentality;
6° to ensure effective management of prisons
and persons serving TIG penalty;
7° to oversee the functioning of
administration of prisons and TIG;
8° to promote productivity and its effective
management in prisons and TIG;
9° to develop professional skills and build
capacity of RCS employees;
10° to develop the skills of detainees and
prisoners, and plan sports and leisure
activities for them;
11° to increase the assets of RCS;
12° senzitisation of RCS activities.
the

CHAPTER III: ORGANIZATION
RESPONSIBILITIES
OF
MANAGEMENT
AND
RCS
Section One : Organization and responsibilities
of RCS management
Article 5: Management bodies
The management bodies of RCS are the High
Council and the High Commission.
Sub-Section One: High Council
Article 6: Responsibilities of the High
Council
The High Council shall be responsible for:
1° defining the RCS vision and plan of action
and monitoring implemention;
2° approving the internal rules and regulations
of RCS;
3° approving the annual draft budget proposal
before it is submitted to the relevant
authorities;
4° determining matters pertaining to the
management, performance and conduct
RCS personnel according to the law;
5° determining matters pertaining to the respect

of detainees and prisoners‟ rights, and any
other initiative contributing
to the
improvement of the management of detainees
and prisoners;
6° determining matters pertaining to
management of prisons and TIG camps;
the
7. approving quarterly reports on RCS activities
and the use of its assets.
Article 7: Members of the High Council
Members of the High Council of RCS shall
appointed by a Presidential Order that determines
among them who shall be the Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and the rapporteur.
Upon his/her initiative, the Minister can take part
in a High Council meeting. In this case, he/she
shall preside over the meeting.
Article 8: Functioning of the High Council
The functioning of the High Council shall
determined by an Order of the Prime Minister.
Sub-section 2: High Commission
Article 9: Executive Authority of RCS
The High Commission shall be the executive
authority of the RCS.

RCS is directed by the Commissioner General,
who is assisted by a Deputy Commissioner
General and other Commissioners who have
different functions.
The Commissioner General, the Deputy
Commissioner
General
and
the
other
Commissioners are appointed and removed from
office by Presidential Order.
Article 10: Responsibilities of the High
Commission
The High Commission is responsible for:
1° preparing the strategic plan and action
plan of RCS;
2° preparing draft internal rules and
regulations of RCS, prisons and TIG
camps;
3° preparing the annual draft budget
proposal of RCS and submitting it to the
High Council;
4° implementing decisions of the High
Council of RCS;
5° ensuring the respect of rights and security
of detainees and prisoners as provided
the law;
6° preparing reports as required by the law;
7° implementing
skill
development
and

capacity-building programs for RCS staff
members;
8° facilitating skill development of detainees
and prisoners;
9° receiving donations
and
approved by the Minister;
bequests
10° take decisions at first instance relating
the management, performance and
conduct of RCS staff members governed
by the General Statutes for Rwanda
Public Service or any specific statutes,
and
making final decisions
employment contract matters;
11° rotating prison guards and other personnel
of RCS except those appointed by
Presidential Order or an Order of the
Prime Minister;
12° performing other functions as may
required by the High Council;
13° performing any other activity that may
help improve the performance of RCS.
Article 11: Composition of the High
Commission
The High Commission shall be comprised of the
following members:

1 o the Commissioner General;
2 o the Deputy Commissioner General;
3 o the Commissioners;
4° the heads of RCS departments.
Article 12: Responsibilities of Commissioner
General of RCS
The Commissioner General of RCS shall have the
following responsibilities:
1° coordinate the activities of RCS;
2° ensure the good management of RCS;
3° draft the organizational structure of RCS;
4° serve as the legal representative of RCS
and inform the public about its activities;
5° implement the
authorities;
6° submit the activity and financial reports
RCS.
decisions
of
higher
Article 13: Responsibilities of RCS Deputy
Commissioner General
The Deputy Commissioner General of RCS shall
have the following responsibilities:
1° replace the Commissioner General
case of his/ her absence;

2° coordinate the activities of the RCS
Commissions;
3° manage the property and the finances
RCS;
4° perform any other activities that may
assigned by higher authorities.
Section 2: Organisation and responsibilities
RCS organs
Article 14: Organisation of organs and
employees’ responsibilities
RCS shall have employees governed by the
General Statutes for Rwanda Public Service, and
other employees governed by employment
contracts, as well as prison guards governed
special statutes established by a Presidential
Order.
The organizational structure and responsibilities
of RCS personnel shall be determined by an Order
of the Prime Minister.
Article 15: Salaries
With the exception of the staff governed by
special statute or employment contracts, salaries
or other benefits allocated to the authorities and
employees of RCS are determined by
Presidential Order.

TITLE II: PRISONS
MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER ONE: PRISONS
Article 16: Prison establishment
Prisons shall be established by Presidential Order.
That order shall also set minimum standards for
constructing prisons, taking into consideration the
respect of neighboring residents and the protection
of environment.
Article 17: Prison security
The prison management shall ensure security of
prison. In order to secure the prison, prison
management shall work closely with security
organs, judicial organs and local government
authorities of the area where the prison is situated.
CHAPTER II: PRISON MANAGEMENT
Article 18: Prison management
The daily management of the prison is carried out
by prison guards supervised by the Prison
Director and governed by special statutes.
AND
PRISON

Article 19:
persons
Surveillance
of
incarcerated
Incarcerated persons are under the surveillance
of prison guards who have appropriate uniform
and equipment.
Prison guards are also charged with surveillance
of incarcerated persons if they leave the prison for
trial, work or any other reasons.
Article 20: Prosecuting offences committed
prison
The Prison Director has the quality of officer
judicial police for offences committed
incarcerated persons both inside the prison
wherever else they are authorised by law to go.
Article 21: Prevention of escape
Prison guards have the duty
incarcerated persons from escaping.
to
prevent
A prison guard who suspects that an incarcerated
person has escaped from prison may arrest
him/her without an arrest warrant issued
competent authorities, and return him/her to the
prison or the nearest Rwanda Police Station.
Article 22: Use of force
The prison guard shall do his/her best

accomplish his/her duties without the use of force.
However, he/she may use appropriate force as
last resort in order to accomplish his/her duties.
The use of force shall be applied reasonably and
in proportion to the gravity of the act committed.
Article 23: Use of firearms
The use of firearms shall be preceded by
warning to the offending person. If the latter
refuses to comply, a prison guard may use his/her
firearm in self defence, to prevent the incarcerated
person‟s escape, or for the protection of other
incarcerated
persons.
Following
such
circumstances, the prison guard shall immediately
inform the prison administration, who shall in turn
inform the Commissioner General.
Article 24: Search
The prison guard may:
1° inspect any object within or brought into
prison;
2°
stop and search any vehicle within the
premises of the prison;
3°
search any person entering or leaving the
prison.
A prison guard on duty in the prison yards may
not allow any person who refuses to be searched
to enter the prison premises, and the guard shall

also order the person to leave the premises.
When a person being searched is found
unlawful possession of an object or item from the
prison, the prison guard who carried out the
search shall arrest that person and hand him/her
over to the Prison Director who shall thoroughly
analyze the case before handing him/her to the
nearest public prosecution authority.
If the person is an incarcerated person, the prison
guard is authorised to confiscate all items that are
prohibited by law, and give them to the Prison
Director who shall thoroughly analyze the case
and prepare a statement thereof signed by him/her
and the incarcerated person and submit the
statement to the Public Prosecution in accordance
with the law.
If the person to be searched is female, she shall
searched by a female prison guard. Where the
person to be searched is male, he shall be searched
by a male prison guard.
A body search shall be conducted by
authorized medical doctor.
Article 25: Files of incarcerated persons
Files of incarcerated persons shall be
managed electronically, and each file shall
include the incarcerated person‟s photo,
names, identity number, date of incarceration,
charges against him/her, copy of the court

judgment, and any other necessary
information regarding the file.
The prison administration has the duty to ensure
that the file of any incarcerated person contains
the required elements mentioned in the first
paragraph of this Article.
Article 26: Inspection of prisons
RCS provides for a regular inspection of the
prisons to ensure compliance with the laws and
regulations.
The Public Prosecution shall carry out regular
inspections of the prisons to ensure that legal
procedures and the sentences determined
courts are being observed.
Prisons shall also be inspected by international
organizations,
according
to
international
conventions ratified by Rwanda.
Article 27: Prison visits
State organs, local or international non-
governmental organisations working in Rwanda,
international organisations providing human rights
protection or humanitarian aid and researchers
may be authorized to carry out prison visits.

TITLE III: DETENTION, RELEASE,
AND EXECUTION OF TIG
CHAPTER ONE: DETENTION AND
RELEASE
Section one: Rights and obligations of
incarcerated person
Article 28: Admission into prison
No person shall be admitted into prison without
committal order bearing the date, number,
signature and the names of the issuer, stamp of the
Court that ordered the imprisonment, particulars
of the incarcerated person and the date of his/her
arrest.
The committal order shall be recorded in
appropriate register which indicates reasons for
imprisonment, duration of imprisonment, the
authority that approved it, day and date, and
kept in his/her file.
Before the person enters the prison, materials that
are prohibited in prison shall be counted and
recorded in the appropriate register, which shall
be signed by the person to be incarcerated and the
Director of the prison. Among the prohibited
materials, some shall be kept by the prison, and
others shall be destructed or taken back to the
incarcerated person‟s residence.
The internal rules and regulations of the prisons
shall determine the implementation of the

provisions of paragraph 3 of this Article.
Article 29: Detention near the family
The prisoner shall be imprisoned near his/her
family‟s residence whenever possible. He/she may
be transferred to another prison, upon approval
the Commissioner General of RCS.
A detainee has the right to appear in court within
the time prescribed by the law. He/she may
transferred to another prison when necessary and
upon approval of the Commissioner General
RCS after consultation with the competent Public
Prosecutor.
If a detainee or prisoner is transferred to another
prison, the authorities of the former prison shall
notify the court that ordered his/her imprisonment,
and any other person chosen by the prisoner or the
detainee. If the person is a detainee, the Public
Prosecutor in charge of the detainee‟s file shall
also be notified.
Article 30: Acts prohibited
incarcerated person
against
An incarcerated person shall be treated at all times
with the respect and dignity inherent to human
beings. In particular, he/she shall be protected
against any form of torture and cruel, inhuman
other degrading treatment.
Any form of discrimination based on ethnicity,

race, sex, language, religion, political opinion,
nationality, social and economic status, birth
any other ground is prohibited.
Article 31: Categorisation
Incarcerated persons shall be placed in categories
and shall be confined in different compartments
the prison in accordance with their sex, age, health
and sentences rendered by Courts.
Incarcerated persons between the ages of fourteen
(14) and eighteen (18) years shall be detained
separately from adults and supervised
competent employees.
Article 32: Respect of gender in prisons
In prisons where both females and males are
incarcerated, the female prison cells shall
supervised by female prison officers. No male
shall be allowed to enter into such areas without
being accompanied by female prison officers.
Cells where males are confined shall
supervised by male prison officers. No female
shall be allowed to enter into such areas without
being accompanied by a male prison officer.

Article 33: Rights of a child who stays with
his/her incarcerated mother
Any incarcerated pregnant or breastfeeding
woman shall be accorded special consideration.
child who is still breast feeding shall be entitled
adequate and nutritional food as required for
infants, and shall be removed from the prison and
given to his/her family at three (3) years of age.
case the child has no family to receive him/her,
the State shall provide a place where he/she shall
be cared for.
Article 34: Uniform of detainees and prisoners
Detainees shall be given different colored uniform
from that of prisoners.
A Ministerial Order shall determine methods
implementing provisions of this Article.
Article 35: Standards required for prisons
Prison quarters shall meet minimum physical
standards with respect to hygiene, water, adequate
ventilation, light and space in order to ensure the
health and hygiene of incarcerated persons.

Article 36: Rations for incarcerated persons
Any incarcerated person has an inalienable right
to a sufficient daily ration of food with a balanced
nutritional value as well as the accessibility
adequate clean drinking water provided by the
Government.
A Ministerial Order shall determine quantity and
quality of ration for an incarcerated person.
Article 37: Sports and entertainment
An incarcerated person has right to go out
his/her cell and be in an open space within the
prison walls. He/she shall also be entitled
leisure time for physical exercise.
Article 38: Religious activities in prison
An incarcerated person has the right to practice
his/her religion, provided that his/her activities
not jeopardize the morals or security of the other
incarcerated persons. Religious teachings in the
prison shall be based on rehabilitation of the
incarcerated persons.
A Ministerial Order shall dermine the manner
which religious denominations registered
Rwanda should exercise religious activities
prisons.

Article 39: Health care for incarcerated
persons
Every prison shall have a medical doctor charged
with the health care of incarcerated persons.
Every incarcerated person has the same right
medical care as any other citizen. Every prison
shall have an infirmary from where patients
receive medical care and that collaborates with the
health centers nearest to the prison. In case
incarcerated person cannot receive appropriate
medical care from the infirmary, he/she shall
transferred to another heath centre.
Upon admission to prison, the incarcerated person
shall be examined by a doctor for any contagious
diseases. An incarcerated person who is diagnosed
with a contagious disease shall be transferred
an appropriate place to receive health care
protect other people from contamination.
A prison medical doctor shall examine issues
relating to disease, hygiene and nutritional status
of prisoners. He/she shall inform the prison
management in writing of any relevant matters
that need to be addressed to protect the health
the incarcerated persons.
An incarcerated person shall not be subject
chemical experiment or any other health research.
Any approved research that may be conducted in
prison shall be authorized by the Minister.

Article 40: Visits
Without prejudice to the public order, every
incarcerated person has the right to be visited
the hours and on the days set by the internal rules
and regulations of the prison, and to communicate
with visitors in the presence of a prison guard
other competent prison staff.
An incarcerated person shall also be entitled to
visited by his/her lawyer during working hours,
and shall be allowed to freely communicate with
the lawyer either verbally or in writing.
Article 41: Written correspondence
An incarcerated person may exchange written
correspondence with persons of his/her choice,
provided that such correspondence is sent
received through the Prison Director.
Article 42: Right to go out of prison
Incarcerated persons are allowed to go out
prison for trainings, work, medical treatment,
consulting their files, trial, giving testimony,
entertainment, to participate in community
meetings or any other reason that is not contrary
to the laws governing incarcerated persons.
such circumstances, the incarcerated person‟s
security shall be ensured by sufficient prison
guards.

Only prisoners of good conduct may be allowed
go out of prison for work.
The prison administration shall keep strict records
of the incarcerated persons going out of the prison
and shall verify their return.
Incarcerated persons are not allowed to actively
participate in social activities like visiting their
families or attending weddings, getting married,
attending funerals or any other events that may
determined by a Ministerial Order.
Article 43: Professional activities performed
incarcerated persons
If possible, incarcerated persons shall have the
right to perform any activity in relation to their
professional skills, and those with no professional
skills shall be trained.
Such activities shall be in line with the objective
of their rehabilitation and to improve their social
welfare in prison.
If such activities are income-generating, ten
percent (10%) of what the person earned shall
allocated to him/her and to those who performed
within the prison activities aiming at improving
the social welfare of incarcerated persons.
If the person entitled to the payment agrees with

the prison administration, the money may be used
in activities that are useful to incarcerated persons.
The nature of such income-generating activities
performed by incarcerated persons shall
determined by a Ministerial Order.
Article 44: Management of money
incarcerated person earns from work
The money an incarcerated person is entitled
from what he/she generates for the prison shall
deposited in an appropriate bank account and
he/she shall be informed of the amount deposited
upon request.
He/she may purchase items of his/her need that
are acceptable in prison from such amount and
may also allow his/her family to use it.
If he/she is released from prison, he/she shall
given the money deposited.
If he/she dies, the money shall be given to his/her
legitimate heir.
Article 45: Work of an incarcerated person
An incarcerated person may be requested or can
himself/herself request to perform work, but
he/she cannot be forced to perform it with the
exception of the provision of Article 50, point
of this Law.

The incarcerated person who performs work shall
not be forced to work beyond his/her capacity
perform work that degrades him/her.
Article 46: Books and media
A prison shall have a library equipped with books,
print media publications, internet, radio, television
and Official Gazettes.
A prison shall also have textbooks for the training
of incarcerated persons. The latter shall also
allowed to bring or receive personal books which
do not harm the objective of rehabilitation
incarcerated persons.
Books an incarcerated person brings or receives
from others shall be presented to the Prison
Director for approval.
Article 47: Conduct in prison
Upon entering the prison, an incarcerated person
shall be informed, in a language he/she
understands, of his/her rights and obligations with
respect to the internal discipline in the prison, and
the procedures for sanctioning offenders
stipulated in the internal rules and regulations
the prison.
Any corrective measures shall be decided upon
the prison management, and such measures must
be justified and explained to the concerned
person. The sanction shall neither degrade nor

jeopardize the fundamental rights of the
incarcerated person, as provided for by this Law.
An incarcerated person who is subject
corrective measures may, himself/herself
through his/her family, appeal to the
Commissioner General against any disciplinary
action taken against him/her in accordance with
provisions of the internal rules and regulations
prisons.
Offences under the Penal Code that are committed
by incarcerated persons shall be referred to the
Public Prosecution for prosecution.
Article 48: Protection of an incarcerated
person’s rights
If the rights of an incarcerated person or his/her
family are violated, the victim or his/her lawyer
shall have the right to seek the assistance from
authorities or the courts.
Article 49: An incarcerated foreigner
An incarcerated foreigner has the right to
explanation
about
provisions
governing
incarcerated persons in a language he/she
understands. He/she has the right to meet
exchange information with his/her country‟s
diplomatic representatives to Rwanda.

An incarcerated foreigner whose country lacks
diplomatic representatives in Rwanda, a refugee,
or a stateless person may, upon approval of the
Minister, seek assistance from diplomatic
representatives of another country or
international organization of his/her choice that
accepts to assist in his/her case.
Article 50: Main obligations of an incarcerated
person
An incarcerated person has the main following
obligations:
1° to abide by national laws;
2° to abide by the laws and regulations which
govern him/her in prison;
3° to avoid spreading divisionism and genocide
ideology;
4° to avoid creating tensions, rumors and
violence;
5° to conduct himself/herself well and respect
Rwandan culture;
6° to ensure his/her own safety and that of other
people;
7° to keep his/her body, clothes and the prison
clean;
8° to perform activities for the development
the country, him/herself and the prison.

Section 2: Release
Article 51: Releasing an incarcerated person
According to the provisions of Article 28 of this
Law, the prison management shall:
1° remind the Court and the Public Prosecution
writing at least seven (7) days before the date
when the provisional detention period expires.
the Public Prosecutor does not tell the Prison
Management that the incarcerated person‟s file
was forwarded to the Court or that the provisional
detention period was extended
before the
expiration of the provisional detention period, the
Prison Management shall release him/her;
2° inform the relevant authorities which prisoners
have completed one quarter (¼) of their sentences,
subject to good conduct, in order for the prisoners
to be discharged on provisional release
accordance with the provisions of the law;
3° release any prisoner after serving his/her term
of imprisonment as determined by the court.
A Prison Director who detains or continues
detain a person whose detention period has
expired shall be punished in accordance with
provisions of the Penal Code.

Article 52: Other conditions for releasing
incarcerated person
Without prejudice to provisions of Article 51
this Law, an incarcerated person shall be released
if:
1° a court decision orders his/her release;
2° he/she is granted a provisional release;
3° a law of general amnesty provides for
release;
4° a Presidential Order pardons him/her.
The release of a prisoner or detainee and
motivation shall be recorded in an appropriate
prison register.
Article 53: Procedures for
incarcerated person
releasing
Before releasing an incarcerated person, the
prison management must:
1° have a copy of the judgment;
2° give the released person a document
indicating the date of entry and the day
release;
3° have the released person sign the
appropriate register;
4°return any personal items to the released

person that have been kept by the prison;
5° give the released person any amount of money
kept for him/her from income-generating
activities performed.
Article 54: Death of an incarcerated person
When an incarcerated person dies while
custody:
1° a death certificate shall be issued
by a certified doctor and recorded in the
appropriate register;
2° the prison management shall
immediately inform the administrative
authorities and the person‟s family;
3° in case he/she is a foreigner, the prison
management shall inform the Minister,
who in turn informs the relevant
authorities;
4° he/she shall be buried by his/her
family, or if that is not possible, by the
prison
respecting relevant laws and
human rights.
CHAPTER II : EXECUTION OF TIG
Article 55: Execution of TIG
RCS shall respect the Presidential Order
determining the execution of TIG.

Article 56: Rights of a person under TIG
A person under TIG shall enjoy all rights of the
prisoner provided for by this Law, except he/she
shall not receive ten percent (10%) of the income
from the work he/she performs.
A Ministerial Order shall determine other rights
he/she may be entitled to.
Article 57: Detention of a person under TIG
When a prisoner under TIG is provisionally
detained because of another new case and
he/she is not convicted by a court of law, the
period spent in the provisional detention
deducted from the days of TIG.
If he/she is convicted of a felony or
misdemeanour while under TIG, his/her TIG shall
become an imprisonment, and shall be added
the new sentence rendered by the court.
When the person under TIG does not respect the
rules governing the work, he/she shall be
put into prison to serve the duration of his/her
sentence.
The document transferring him/her to the prison
because of his/her rejection of TIG shall be signed
by a judge of the Primary Court where he/she was
supposed to perform TIG.

CHAPTER III: CORRECTIVE EDUCATION
Article 58: Partnership in corrective education
RCS has a fundamental task of rehabilitating
detainees and prisoners in order to prepare them
be good citizens.
Such objectives may be achieved through
education,
work,
cultural,
sports
and
entertainment activities. In order to achieve this,
RCS shall collaborate with other state organs,
non-governmantal organisations and the private
sector.
The management of RCS, the prison guards and
other personnel of the prisons shall have the
capacity to make follow up of prisoners and
detainees in order to complete their sentences with
improved characater.
Article 59: Main considerations in education
RCS shall consider the following in educating
prisoners and detainees:
1° how to rehabilitate prisoners and detainees;
2° giving moral and material assistatnce
prisoners and detainees;
3° organizing discussions between incarcerated

persons and members of the public in order
promote good relations.
Prisoners and detainees shall be educated
government policies and self-development
opportunities.
TITLE IV: PROPERTY AND FINANCING
OF RCS
Article 60: Source of RCS property
RCS property is composed of both movable and
immovable property.
The property of RCS shall be derived from:
1° the State budget;
2° the income from services performed
prisoners and detainees;
3° the earnings from the property of RCS;
4° donations and bequests;
5° loans granted to RCS approved by the
Minister in charge of Finance ;
6° grants from the State or donors.
Article 61: Transfer of property
The property of the National Service (SNP) and
the Executive Secretariat of the National
Committee for Alternative Penalties
Imprisonment (SETIG) are hereby transferred
RCS.
The property of prisons that were managed

Districts is also transferred to RCS.
Article 62: Use, management and audit of the
property
The use, management and audit of RCS property
shall be carried out in accordance with relevant
legal provisions on public finance.
The internal audit service responsible for daily
auditing of the use of RCS property shall submit
report to the High Council.
The Auditor General of State Finance controls the
management and use of the finances and property
of RCS.
TITLE V: TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL
PROVISIONS
CHAPTER ONE: TRANSITIONAL
PROVISIONS
Article 63: Former employees of merged
institutions
The National Prison Service (SNP) and Executive
Secretariat of the National Committee for
Alternative Penalties to Imprisonment (SETIG)
are merged into the Rwanda Correctional Service
(RCS).
Existing employees of the administration of the

National Prison Service and the Executive
Secretariat of the National Committee for
Alternative Penalties to Imprisonment who fulfill
the required conditions during recruitment shall
placed in RCS in accordance with the General
Statutes for Rwanda Public Service and the
Labour Code.
Without prejudice to existing rights, these
employees shall be categorized according to their
appointments.
Employees who do not fulfill the required
conditions shall be removed in accordance with
the law.
Article 64: Transitional period
While RCS has not been given managers, the
National Prison Service and the Executive
Secretariat of the National Committee for
Alternative Penalties to Imprisonment shall
continue to operate for a period not exceeding six
(6) months from the date this Law is published
the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda.
CHAPTER II: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 65: Drafting, consideration
adoption of this law
and
This Law was drafted, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 66: Repealing provision
and

The Law n° 38/2006 of September 25, 2006
establishing and determining the organisation
the National Prisons Service, and all prior
provisions contrary to Law are hereby repealed.
Article 67: Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 12/11/2010
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MAKUZA Bernard
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
KARUGARAMA Tharcisse
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

LAW
N°38/2010
OF
25/11/2010
ESTABLISHING RWANDA AGRICULTURE
BOARD (RAB) AND DETERMINING ITS
RESPONSIBILITIES , ORGANISATION
AND FUNCTIONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Definitions of terms
Article 3: Head Office of RAB
CHAPTER II: RESPONSIBILITIES OF RAB
Article 4 : Responsibilties of RAB
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF RAB AND ITS CATEGORY
Article 5: Authority supervising RAB and
category
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF RAB
Article 6: Management organs of RAB
AND
Section One: Board of Directors
Article 7: Board of Directors of RAB

Article 8: Sitting allowances for members of
the Board of Directors
Article 9: Incompatibilities with membership
of the Board of Directors
Section 2: General Directorate
Article 10: Composition of
Directorate
the General
Article 11: Statute governing staff of RAB and
benefits of members of the General Directorate
and the staff of RAB
Article 12: Functioning,organization and
responsibilities of organs of RAB
CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 13:Property of RAB and its sources
Article 14: Transfer of Public Institutions
property
Article 15: Use, management and audit of the
property
Article 16: Approval and management of the
budget of RAB
Article 17: Annual financial report

CHAPTER VI: TRANSITIONAL AND
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 18: Transitional period
Article 19: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
Article 20: Repealing provision
Article 21: Commencement

LAW
N°38/2010
OF
25/11/2010
ESTABLISHING RWANDA AGRICULTURE
BOARD (RAB) AND DETERMINING ITS
RESPONSIBILITIES, ORGANISATION AND
FUNCTIONING
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
October 2010;
The Senate, in its session of 12 October 2010;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 49, 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90,
92, 93,94, 95, 108, 113, 118, 183 and 201;

Pursuant to the Organic Law n° 06/2009/OL
21/12/2009 establishing general provisions
governing public institutions;
Pursuant to the Organic Law n° 04/2005
08/04/2005 determining the modalities
protection, conservation and promotion
environment in Rwanda;
Pursuant to Law n° 58/2008 of 10/09/2008
determining the organisation and management
aquaculture and fishing in Rwanda;
Pursuant to Law nº 54/2008 of 10/09/2008
determining the prevention and fight against
contagious diseases for domestic animals
Rwanda;
Pursuant to Law n° 14/2003 of 23/05/2003
production, quality control and commercialization
of plant quality seeds;
Pursuant to Law n° 33/2002 of 06/11/2002
regarding livestock identification;
Having reviewed Law n° 40/2006 of 30/09/2006
establishing and determining the organization,
responsibilities and functioning of Rwanda
Agricultural Development Authority (RADA);
Having reviewed Law n° 41/2006 of 30/09/2006
establishing the responsibilities, structure and
functioning of Rwanda Animal Resources
Development Authority (RARDA);

Having reviewed Law n° 42/2006 of 30/09/2006
determining the responsibilities, organization and
functioning of Rwanda Institute of Agricultural
Research (ISAR);
ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
This Law establishes the Rwanda Agriculture
Board, abbreviated as “RAB”. It also determines
its responsibilities, organisation and functioning.
RAB shall have legal personality, administrative
and financial autonomy and shall be governed
accordance with laws governing public
institutions.
Article 2: Definitions of terms
For the purpose of this Law, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:
1° “zone” : branch of RAB enabling it
achieve its mission and collaborate with
administrative decentralized entities;
2° “agricultural extension”: services meant
for farmers in the context of strengthening

their capacities and knowhow in order for
them to increase agricultural and animal
production and by-products;
3° “agriculture”: any land activities relating
to any plants and forests as well as the
germination of seedlings;
4° “animal husbandry”: any operations
aiming at animal production for a targeted
interest;
5° “domestic animal”: any animal kept
land, in water, forest or any wild animal
locked up in a given area.
Article 3: Head Office of RAB
The Head Office of RAB shall be located
Kigali City, the Capital of the Republic
Rwanda. It may be transferred elsewhere on the
Rwandan territory if deemed necessary.
RAB shall have four (4) zonal branches in order
to fulfil its mission and work closely with
decentralized administrative entities. It may have
other branches if deemed necessary, upon
approval by an Order of the Prime Minister.

CHAPTER II: RESPONSIBILITIES OF RAB
Article 4: Responsibities of RAB
RAB has the general mission of developing
agriculture and animal husbandry through their
reform, and using modern methods in crop and
animal
production,
research,
agricultural
extension, education and training of farmers
new technologies.
In particular, RAB shall have the following
responsibilities :
1° to implement the national policy
agriculture and animal husbandry;
2° to contribute in determining policy
agriculture, animal husbandry, agricultural
and animal husbandry research and
technology;
3° to provide farmers and consumers
agricultural products with information,
techniques and services meant for improving
their profession and supplying the internal
market with increased and quality production
thereby raising their agricultural and animal
husbandry incomes;
4° to prevent and fight animal diseases and
implement appropriate strategies meant for
ensuring control, prevention, diagnosis and
treatment of animal diseases;

5° to prevent and control plant diseases, insects
and pests and implement appropriate
strategies meant for ensuring control and
prevention of plant diseases;
6° to conduct baseline survey and research
aiming at development and solving problems
identified in agriculture and animal husbandry
and by products;
7° to monitor and coordinate activities of persons
exercising the profession of agriculture,
animal husbandry and research and
stakeholders;
8° to identify and provide farmers with new
technologies for proper management of land,
water and use of agricultural and animal
husbandry mechanisation;
9° to coordinate activities aiming at promoting
agricultural
and
animal
husbandry
infrastructure;
10° to examine and issue certificates of standards
for agricultural and animal husbandry
products meant for export;
11° to examine, verify and issue certificates
authorising imports of domestic animals,
semen, fertilised eggs, seeds, plants and
cuttings and other agricultural and animal
husbandry products;

12° to work closely with other institutions
charge of standards and environment while
importing fertilizers, crop protection products
and other agricultural and animal husbandry
inputs;
13° to contribute in establishing, publicising and
enforcing laws and regulations governing
agriculture, animal husbandry, research
well as related products;
14° to establish relations and collaborate with
other regional and international institutions
having the same mission as RAB;
15° to ensure preparation, conservation, issuance
and use of veterinary and crop protection
products as well as their import and export;
16° to issue licence and control the trade
veterinary products and agriculture inputs;
17° to ensure and monitor activities of production,
control and trade of selected seeds;
18° to collect national and international
innovations, new and appropriate technologies
and refine them for use in agriculture and
animal husbandry in Rwanda;
19° to provide agricultural extension services

accordance with agricultural and animal
husbandry needs;
20° to coordinate activities of agricultural
extension and research plans and disseminate
such agricultural and animal husbandry needs
as determined by zonal branches of RAB;
21° to support and coordinate agricultural
extension and research activities
administrative decentralised entities;
22° to support agricultural and animal husbandry
cooperatives towards a better service delivery;
23° to ensure partnership and coordinate activities
of the non governmental organizations,
private operators and organs involved
implementation of agricultural and animal
husbandry programmes.
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF RAB AND ITS CATEGORY
Article 5: Supervising authority of RAB and
category
A Primer Minister‟s order shall determine the
supervising authority of RAB and its category.
There shall be concluded between the supervising
authority of RAB and the decision making organ

performance contract determining competence,
rights and obligations of each party in order for
RAB to fulfil its mission.
Such a contract shall be valid for a period of the
term of office of members of the decision making
Organ of RAB.
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF RAB
AND
Article 6: Management organs of RAB
RAB shall be comprised of the following two (2)
management organs:
1° the Board of Directors;
2° the General Directorate.
A Primer Minister‟s Order may determine other
relevant organs in order for RAB to fulfil
mission.
Section One: Board of Directors
Article 7: Board of Directors of RAB
The Board of Directors of RAB shall be
governing and decision making organ.
competence, responsibilities and functioning
well as the term of office for its members shall
determined by a Prime Minister‟s Order.
A Presidential Order shall appoint members of the
Board of Directors including the Chairperson and

the Deputy Chairperson. Members of the Board
Directors shall be selected on the basis of their
competence and expertise.
At least thirty percent (30%) of members of the
Board of Directors shall be female.
Article 8: Sitting allowances for members of
the Board of Directors
Members of the Board of Directors present in the
meetings of the Board of Directors shall
entitled to sitting allowances determined by
Presidential Order.
Article 9: Incompatibilities with membership
of the Board of Directors
Members of the Board of Directors shall not
allowed to perform any remunerated activity
within RAB.
They shall also not be allowed, neither
individually nor companies in which they hold
shares, to bid for tenders of RAB.
Section 2: General Directorate
Article 10: Composition of
Directorate of RAB
the General
Members of the General Directorate of RAB shall
be determined by a Presidental Order.
The competence, responsibilities and functioning

of the members of the General Directorate shall
determined by a Prime Minister‟s Order.
Article 11: Statute governing staff of RAB and
benefits of members of the General Directorate
and the staff of RAB
The staff of RAB shall be governed by the
General Statute for Rwanda Public Service.
Benefits allocated to the members of the General
Directorate and to the staff of RAB shall
determined in accordance with legal provisions
governing benefits to employees of public
institutions.
Article 12: Functioning, organization and
responsibilities of organs of RAB
The functioning, organization and responsibilities
of organs of RAB shall be determined by the
Prime Minister‟s Order.
CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 13 : Propety of RAB and its sources
The property of RAB shall be comprised
movables and immovables.
The property of RAB shall come from the
following sources:

1° the State budget allocation;
2° State or donors subsidies;
3° income from its services;
4° interest from its property;
5° loans to RAB, as approved by the
Minister in charge of finance;
6° donation and bequest;
7° property of merged public institutions
provided for in this Law and property
Rwanda Coffee Development Authority
(OCIR-CAFÉ),
Rwanda
Tea
Development Authority ( OCIR THE)
and Rwanda Horticulture Development
Authority (RHODA) which are not
transferred to the National Agricultural
Export Development Board (NAEB).
Article 14 : Transfer of Public Institutions
property
Movable, immovable property, liabilities and
denominations of the following institutions are
hereby transferred to RAB:
1° Rwanda
Agriculture
Authority (RADA) ;
Development
2° Rwanda Animal Resources Development
Authority (RARDA);

3° Rwanda Institute of Agricultural Research
(ISAR);
4° movable, immovable property and
liabilities of the following institutions not
transferred to National Agricultural
Export Development Board (NAEB):
a) Rwanda Coffee Development Authority
(OCIR-CAFE) ;
b) Rwanda Tea Development Authority
(OCIR-THE);
c) Rwanda
Horticulture
Authority (RHODA).
Development
Article 15: Use, management and audit of the
property
The use, management and audit of the property
RAB shall be carried out in accordance with
relevant legal provisions. RAB internal audit
service shall submit a report to the Board
Directors with a copy to the head of the General
Directorate of RAB.
Article 16: Approval and management of the
budget of RAB
The budget of RAB shall be approved and
managed in accordance with relevant legal
provisions.

Article 17: Annual financial report
Within three (3) months following the closure
the financial year, the head of the General
Directorate of RAB shall submit to the
supervising authority of RAB annual financial
report after its approval by the Board of Directors
in accordance with laws governing management
of State finance and property.
CHAPTER VI: TRANSITIONAL
FINAL PROVISIONS
AND
Article 18 : Transitional period
RAB is given a period not exceeding six (6)
months from the date of publication of this Law
in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda
to merge activities formerly performed by the
following institutions:
1° Rwanda
Agriculture
Authority (RADA);
Development
2° Rwanda Animal Resources Development
Authority (RARDA);
3° Rwanda
Institute
Research (ISAR);
of
Agricultural
4° activities of agriculture
development

transferred to RAB formerly perfomed
by the following institutions:
a) Rwanda Coffee Development Authority
(OCIR-CAFE) ;
b)
Rwanda Tea Development Authority
(OCIR-THE);
c) Rwanda
Horticulture
Authority (RHODA).
Article 19: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
Development
consideration
and
This Law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 20: Repealing provision
Law n° 40/2006 of 30/09/2006 establishing and
determining the organization, responsibilities and
functioning of Rwanda Agricultural Development
Authority (RADA), Law n° 41/2006
30/09/2006 establishing the responsibilities,
structure and functioning of Rwanda Animal
Resources Development Authority (RARDA),
Law n° 42/2006 of 30/09/2006 determining the
responsibilities, organization and functioning
Rwanda Institute of Agricultural Research (ISAR)
and all prior legal provisions inconsistent with this
Law are hereby repealed.

Article 21: Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 25/11/2010
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MAKUZA Bernard
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
KARUGARAMA Tharcisse
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

LAW
N°39/2010
OF
25/11/2010
ESTABLISHING
NATIONAL
AGRICULTURAL
EXPORT
DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NAEB) AND
DETERMINING ITS RESPONSIBILITIES,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Head office of NAEB
CHAPTER
NAEB
Article 3 : Responsibilities of NAEB
II:
RESPONSIBILITIES
OF
CHAPTER III: SUPERVISING AUTHORITY
OF NAEB AND ITS CATEGORY
Article 4: Supervising authority of NAEB and
its category
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF NAEB
Article 5: Management organs of NAEB
AND

Section One: Board of Directors
Article 6: Board of Directors of NAEB
Article 7: Sitting allowances for members
the Board of Directors
Article 8: Incompatibilities with membership
of the Board of Directors
Section 2: General Directorate
Article 9: Composition
Directorate of NAEB
of
the
General
Article 10: Statute governing staff of NAEB
and benefits of Members of the General
Directorate and staff of NAEB
Article 11: Functioning, organization and
responsibilities of organs of NAEB
CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 12: Property of NAEB and its sources
Article 13: Transfer of property of Public
Institutions
Article 14: Use, management and audit of the
property
Article 15: Approval and management of the
budget of NAEB

Article 16: Annual financial report
CHAPTER VI: TRANSITIONAL
FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 17: Transitional period
Article 18: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
AND
and
Article 19: Repealing provision
Article 20: Commencement

LAW
N°39/2010
OF
25/11/2010
ESTABLISHING
NATIONAL
AGRICULTURAL
EXPORT
DEVELOPMENT BOARD (NAEB) AND
DETERMINING ITS RESPONSIBILITIES,
ORGANISATION AND FUNCTIONING
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
October 2010;
The Senate, in its session of 12 October 2010;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003 as amended to date,
especially in Articles 49, 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90,
92, 93, 94, 95, 108, 113, 118, 183 and 201;

Pursuant to the Organic Law n° 06/2009/OL
21/12/2009 establishing general provisions
governing public institutions;
Pursuant to the Organic Law n° 04/2005
08/04/2005 determining the modalities
protection, conservation and promotion
environment in Rwanda;
Having reviewed Law n° 48/2006 of 05/10/2006
determining the responsibilities, organisation and
functioning of Rwanda Coffee Development
Authority (OCIR-CAFE);
Having reviewed Law n° 49/2006 of 05/10/2006
determining the responsibilities, organisation and
functioning of Rwanda Tea Development
Authority (OCIR-THE);
Having reviewed Law n° 15/2008 of 09/06/2008
on the establishment of Rwanda Horticulture
Development
Authority
(RHODA)
and
determining its responsibilities, organization and
functioning;
ADOPTS:
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article One: Purpose of this Law
This Law establishes the National Agricultural
Export Development Board, abbreviated
“NAEB”. This Law also determines

responsibilities, organisation and functioning.
NAEB shall have a legal personality,
administrative and financial autonomy and shall
be governed in accordance with laws governing
public institutions.
Article 2: Head office of NAEB
The head office of NAEB shall be located
Kigali City, the Capital of the Republic
Rwanda. It may be transferred elsewhere
Rwanda if deemed necessary.
NAEB may have branches elsewhere in or outside
the country if deemed necessary upon approval
a Prime Minister‟s Order.
A Prime Minister‟s Order shall specify the place
where these branches shall be established.
CHAPTER
NAEB
Article 3 : Responsiblilities of NAEB
NAEB has the following responsibilities:
II:
RESPONSIBILITIES
OF
1° to participate in elaboration of policies
and strategies for developing exports
agricultural and livestock products;

2° to implement policies and strategies for
promoting and developing agricultural
and livestock products for export;
3° to identify and support research
agricultural
extension
regarding
agricultural and livestock products for
export;
4° to collaborate with other institutions
identify places where to install factories
processing agricultural and livestock
products for export and to grant them
authorization;
5° to set quality standards of agriculture and
livestock export commodities and make
sure they are implemented ;
6° to issue certificates of origin for
agricultural and livestock products for
export as provided for by relevant laws;
7° to supervise, facilitate and train private
operators and cooperatives involved
agricultural and livestock production for
export to benefit them and the country;
8° to partner with and coordinate activities
Non Governmental organisations, private

operators
exporting
products;
and organs involved
agricultural and livestock
9° to contribute to increase investments
industry and infrastructure meant for
adding value to agricultural and livestock
products for export ;
10° to collect information on local, regional
and international markets and disseminate
them to stakeholders for use;
11° to coordinate activities of stakeholder
networks as regards agricultural and
livestock products for export;
12° to participate in various international
negotiations and trade fairs, both in and
outside the country to promote
agricultural and livestock products for
market expansion and greater number
consumers of agricultural and livestock
products from Rwanda;
13° to establish good relations with
international organisations with regard
develop agricultural and livestock
products export from Rwanda.

CHAPTER III: AUTHORITY SUPERVISING
NAEB AND ITS CATEGORY
Article 4: Supervising authority of NAEB and
its category
A Prime Minister‟s Order shall determine the
authority supervising NAEB and its category.
There shall be a performance contract between
the authority supervising NAEB and the decision
making organ determining the competence, rights
and obligations of each party in order for NAEB
to fulfil its mission.
Such a contract shall be valid for a period equal
the term of office of members of the decision
making Organ of NAEB.
CHAPTER IV: ORGANISATION
FUNCTIONING OF NAEB
Article 5: Management organs of NAEB
AND
NAEB shall be comprised of the following two
(2) management organs:
1° the Board of Directors;
2° the General Directorate.
A Prime Minister‟s Order may determine other
relevant organs in order for NAEB to fulfil
mission.

Section One: Board of Directors
Article 6: Board of Directors of NAEB
The Board of Directors of NAEB shall be the
governing and decision making organ.
competence, responsibilities and functionning
well as the term of office for its members shall
determined by a Prime Minister‟s Order.
A Presidential Order shall appoint members of the
Board of Directors including the Chairperson and
the Deputy Chairperson. Members of the Board
Directors shall be selected on the basis of their
competence and expertise.
At least thirty per cent (30 %) of members of the
Board of Directors shall be female.
Article 7: Sitting allowances for members
the Board of Directors
Members of the Board of Directors present in the
meetings of the Board of Directors shall
entitled to sitting allowances determined by
Presidential Order.
Article 8: Incompatibilities with membership
of the Board of Directors
Members of the Board of Directors shall not
allowed to perform any remunerated activity
within NAEB
They
shall
also
not
be
allowed,
neither

individually nor companies in which they hold
shares, to bid for tenders of NAEB.
Section 2: General Directorate
Article 9: Composition
Directorate of NAEB
of
the
General
Members of the General Directorate of NAEB
shall be determined by a Presidential Order.
The competence, responsabilities and functioning
of the members of the General Direcorate
NAEB shall be determined by a Prime Minister‟s
Order.
Article 10: Statute governing staff of NAEB
and benefits of members of the General
Directorate and the staff of NAEB
The staff of NAEB is governed by the General
Statute for Rwanda Public Service.
Benefits allocated to the members of the General
Directorate and to the staff of NAEB shall
determined in accordance with legal provisions
governing benefits to employees of public
institutions.
Article 11: Functioning, organization and
responsibilities of organs of NAEB
The functioning, organization and responsibilities
of organs of NAEB shall be determined by
Prime Minister‟s Order.

CHAPTER V: PROPERTY AND FINANCE
Article 12: Property of NAEB and its source
The property of NAEB shall be comprised
movables and immovables.
The property of NAEB
following sources:
shall come from the
1°
2°
3°
4°
5°
6° donations and bequests ;
7° property of merged public institutions
provided for in this Law, except what will
be allocated to Rwanda Agricultural
Board (RAB).
State allocated budget ;
State or donors' subsidies;
income from its services;
interest from its property;
loans to NAEB as approved by the
Minister in charge of finance;
Article 13: Transfer of property of Public
Institutions
Without prejudice to the provisions of Article 12,
of this Law, movable and immovable assets,
liabilities and denominations of the following
institutions are hereby transferred to NAEB:
1° Rwanda Coffee Development Authority
(OCIR-CAFE) ;

2° Rwanda Tea Development Authority
(OCIR-THE);
3° Rwanda
Horticulture
Authority (RHODA).
Development
Article 14: Use, management and audit of the
property
Use, management and audit of NAEB property
shall be carried out in accordance with relevant
legal provisions. NAEB internal audit service
shall submit a report to the Board of Directors
with a copy to the head of the General Directorate
of NAEB.
Article 15: Approval and management of the
budget of NAEB
The budget of NAEB shall be approved and
managed in accordance with relevant legal
provisions.
Article 16: Annual financial report
Within three (3) months following the closure
the financial year, the head of the General
Directorate of NAEB shall submit to the authority
supervising NAEB annual financial report after
approval by the Board of Directors in accordance
with laws governing management of State finance
and property.

CHAPTER VI: TRANSITIONAL
FINAL PROVISIONS
AND
Article 17: Transitional period
NAEB is given a period not exceeding six (6)
months from the date of publication of this Law
in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Rwanda
to merge activities of export development
formerly performed by the following institutions
1° Rwanda Coffee Development Authority
(OCIR-CAFE) ;
2° Rwanda Tea Development Authority
(OCIR-THE);
3° Rwanda
Horticulture
Authority (RHODA).
Article 18: Drafting,
adoption of this Law
Development
consideration
and
This Law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 19: Repealing provision
Law n° 48/2006 of 05/10/2006 determining, the
responsibilities, organisation and functioning

Rwanda Coffee Development Authority (OCIR-
CAFE), Law n° 49/2006 of 05/10/2006
determining the responsibilities, organisation and
functioning of Rwanda Tea Development
Authority (OCIR-THE), Law n° 15/2008
09/06/2008 on the establishment of Rwanda
Horticulture Development Authority (RHODA)
and determining its responsibilities, organization
and functioning as well as all prior legal
provisions contrary to this Law are hereby
repealed.
Article 20: Commencement
Kigali, on 25/11/2010
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MAKUZA Bernard
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
KARUGARAMA Tharcisse
Minister of Justice/Attorney General

LAW
Nº47/2010
OF
22/12/2010
AUTHORISING THE RATIFICATION OF
THE AMENDMENTS OF ARTICLES OF
AGREEMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY FUND
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article One: Authorisation for ratification
Article 2 : Drafting, consideration and
adoption of this Law
Article 3 : Commencement

LAW
Nº47/2010
OF
22/12/2010
AUTHORISING THE RATIFICATION OF
THE AMENDMENTS OF ARTICLES OF
AGREEMENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY FUND
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA.
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
November 2010;
The Senate, in its session of 22 November 2010;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003, as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
93, 94, 95, 108, 189, 190 and 201;
Having considered resolution n° 63-2 relating
enhancement of the voice and participation

International Monetary Fund, and the resolution
n° 63-3 relating to the expansion of the
Investment Authority of the International
Monetary Fund, amending the Articles
Agreement of International Monetary Fund and
both approved by the Board of Governors
respectively on 28 April 2008 and on 05 May
2008;
ADOPTS:
Article One: Authorisation for ratification
The resolution n° 63-2 relating to enhancement
the voice and participation in International
Monetary Fund, and the resolution n° 63-3
relating to the expansion of the Investment
Authority of the International Monetary Fund,
amending the Articles of Agreement
International Monetary Fund and both approved
by the Board of Governors respectively on
April 2008 and on 05 May 2008, are hereby
authorized for ratification.
Article 2 : Drafting,
adoption of this Law
consideration
and
This Law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.

Article 3 : Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 22/12/2010
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MAKUZA Bernard
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
KARUGARAMA Tharcisse
Minister of Justice/ Attorney General

LAW
Nº49/2010
OF
28/12/2010
AUTHORISING THE RATIFICATION OF
THE PROTOCOL SIGNED IN BRUSSELS,
BELGIUM ON 17 MAY 2010 AMENDING
THE CONVENTION SIGNED IN KIGALI,
RWANDA ON 16 APRIL 2007 BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA AND THE
KINGDOM OF BELGIUM FOR THE
AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION
AND PREVENTION OF TAX FRAUD AND
FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO
TAXES ON INCOME AND ON CAPITAL
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article One: Authorisation for ratification
Ingingo ya 2 : Drafting, consideration and
adoption of this Law
Article 3: Commencement

LAW
Nº49/2010
OF
28/12/2010
AUTHORISING THE RATIFICATION OF
THE PROTOCOL SIGNED IN BRUSSELS,
BELGIUM ON 17 MAY 2010 AMENDING
THE CONVENTION SIGNED IN KIGALI,
RWANDA ON 16 APRIL 2007 BETWEEN
THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA AND THE
KINGDOM OF BELGIUM FOR THE
AVOIDANCE OF DOUBLE TAXATION
AND PREVENTION OF TAX FRAUD AND
FISCAL EVASION WITH RESPECT TO
TAXES ON INCOME AND ON CAPITAL
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA.
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
November 2010;
The Senate, in its session of 22 November 2010;

Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003, as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
93, 94, 95, 108, 189, 190 and 201;
Having considered the Protocol signed in Brussels
in Belgium on 17 May 2010 amending the
convention signed in Kigali, in Rwanda on
April 2007 between the Republic of Rwanda and
the Kingdom of Belgium for the avoidance
double taxation and prevention of tax fraud and
fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income and
on capital;
ADOPTS:
Article One: Authorization for ratification
The Protocol signed in Brussels, Belgium on
May 2010, amending the convention signed
Kigali on 16 April 2007 between the Republic
Rwanda and the Kingdom of Belgium for the
avoidance of double taxation and prevention
tax fraud and fiscal evasion with respect to taxes
on income and on capital, is hereby authorized for
ratification.
Ingingo ya 2 : Drafting, consideration and
adoption of this Law
This Law was drafted in English, considered and

adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 3: Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 28/12/2010
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MAKUZA Bernard
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
KARUGARAMA Tharcisse
Minister of Justice/ Attorney General

LAW
Nº50/2010
OF
28/12/2010
AUTHORISING THE RATICATION OF
THE LOAN AGREEMENT Nº 815 SIGNED
IN KIGALI, RWANDA, ON 24 SEPTEMBER
2010, BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF
RWANDA AND THE KUWAIT FUND FOR
ARAB
ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT,
RELATING TO THE LOAN OF FOUR
MILLION ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
KUWAITI DINARS (K.D 4,100,000) FOR
THE EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE INTEGRATED POLYTECHNIC
REGIONAL
CENTER
PROJECT
(IN
KICUKIRO-KIGALI)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article One: Authorisation for ratification
Article 2 : Drafting,
adoption of this Law
Article 3 : Commencement
consideration
and

LAW
Nº50/2010
OF
28/12/2010
AUTHORISING THE RATICATION OF
THE LOAN AGREEMENT Nº 815 SIGNED
IN KIGALI, RWANDA, ON 24 SEPTEMBER
2010, BETWEEN THE REPUBLIC OF
RWANDA AND THE KUWAIT FUND FOR
ARAB
ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT,
RELATING TO THE LOAN OF FOUR
MILLION ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
KUWAITI DINARS (K.D 4,100,000) FOR
THE EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT
OF THE INTEGRATED POLYTECHNIC
REGIONAL
CENTER
PROJECT
(IN
KICUKIRO-KIGALI)
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE
OF THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA.
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
November 2010;

The Senate, in its session of 06 December 2010;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 04 June 2003, as amended to date,
especially in Articles 62, 66, 67, 88, 89, 90, 92,
93, 94, 95, 108, 189, 190 and 201;
Having considered the Loan Agreement nº 815
signed in Kigali, Rwanda, on September 24, 2010,
between the Republic of Rwanda and the Kuwait
Fund for Arab Economic Development, relating
the loan of four million one hundred thousand
Kuwaiti Dinars (K.D 4,100,000) for the
Expansion and Development of the Integrated
Polytechnic Regional Center Project (in Kicukiro-
Kigali);
ADOPTS :
Article One : Authorisation for ratification
The Loan Agreement nº 815 signed in Kigali,
Rwanda, on 24 September 2010, between the
Republic of Rwanda and the Kuwait Fund for
Arab Economic Development, relating to the loan
of four million one hundred thousand Kuwaiti
Dinars (K.D 4,100,000) for the Expansion and
Development of the Integrated Polytechnic
Regional Center Project (in Kicukiro-Kigali),

hereby authorized for ratification.
Article 2: Drafting, consideration and adoption
of this Law
This Law was drafted in English, considered and
adopted in Kinyarwanda.
Article 3 : Commencement
This Law shall come into force on the date of
publication in the Official Gazette of the Republic
of Rwanda.
Kigali, on 28/12/2010
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
MAKUZA Bernard
Prime Minister

Seen and sealed with the Seal of the Republic:
(sé)
KARUGARAMA Tharcisse
Minister of Justice/Attorney General