Gazette n° Special of 08/11/2019
page/urup.
/ Loi
y’imanza z’inshinjabyaha
procedure ……………………………………………..2
……………………………………………………….2

LAW Nº 027/2019 OF 19/09/2019
RELATING
TO
THE
CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TITLE ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
ONE:
PROVISIONS
PRELIMINARY
Article One: Purpose of this Law
Article 2: Scope of application
Article 3: Definitions
CHAPTER II: ACTIONS ARISING FROM
AN OFFENCE
Section One: Criminal action
Article 4: Competent authority to institute
criminal action

Article 5: Grounds for termination
criminal action
Article 6: Prescription of a criminal action
Article 7: Time of commencement of the
prescriptive period of a criminal action
Article 8: Interruption of the prescriptive
period of a criminal action
Article 9: Grounds for suspension of the
prescriptive period of an action
Section 2: Civil action
Article 10: Person empowered to institute
civil action
Article 11: Person against whom a civil
action is instituted
Article 12: Prescription of a civil action
Article 13: Failure to institute a civil action
Article 14: Waiver of a civil action

TITLE II: INVESTIGATION
CHAPTER ONE: INVESTIGATION OF
THE
ORGAN
IN
CHARGE
OF
INVESTIGATION
Article 15: Functions of the organ in charge
of investigation
Article 16: Responsibilities of investigators
Article 17: Powers to investigate
Article 18: Procedure for filing a complaint
with the organ in charge of investigation
Article 19: Preserving evidence
Article 20: Summons by an investigator
Article 21: Contents of the statement that
concludes preliminary investigations
Article 22: Submission of a case file
CHAPTER II: INVESTIGATION OF THE
PUBLIC PROSECUTION

Article 23: Persons who are competent
conduct prosecution
Article 24: Obligations of a prosecutor upon
receipt of the case file
Article 25: Fine without trial
Article 26: Plea bargaining
Article 27: Effects of plea bargaining
Article 28: Procedures for summoning
suspect
Article 29: Summons
Article 30: Warrant to appear
Article 31: Warrant to bring by force
Article 32: Summoning a witness
Article 33: A warrant to bring by force
issued against a witness who refuses
appear

Article 34: Remission of penalty for a witness
facing penalties for refusal to appear
Article 35: Provisional arrest warrant issued
by a prosecutor
Article 36: International arrest warrant
Article 37: Enforcement of a warrant
bring by force and arrest warrant
Article 38: Interception of communication
investigations and prosecution
Article 39: Order for interception
communication and correspondences and
note taking
Article 40: Statement of interception
communications and correspondences
Article 41: Prohibitions regarding seizure
interception
Article 42: Assistance in investigation

Article 43: Competence of a prosecutor
delegated investigator
CHAPTER III: COMMON PROVISIONS
ON INVESTIGATION BETWEEN THE
ORGAN
IN
CHARGE
OF
INVESTIGATION AND THE PUBLIC
PROSECUTION
Article 44: Visiting the scene of crime
Article 45: Interrogation
Article 46: Rights of the suspect during
interrogation
Article 47: Witness oath
Article 48: Testimony of a person having
participated in the commission of an offence
or a victim of offence
Article 49: Minor’s testimony
Article 50: Modalities for writing a statement
Article 51: Signing the statement
Article 52: Confrontation

Article 53: Urgent
confrontation
interrogation
Article 54: Rights of the victim during
interrogation
Article 55: Search
Article 56: Conducting body search or
body cavity search
Article 57: Seizure and caveat of objects
Article 58: Management of the seized
property
Article 59: Statement of seizure
Article 60: Authorization to search and visit
any place where evidence may be found
Article 61: Search warrant
Article 62: Knowing the contents of the
search warrants
Article 63: Inventory and marking of the
items seized

Article 64: Statement of visit, search and
seizure
Article 65: Criminal proceedings against
person caught red-handed, presumed to have
been caught red-handed or who pleads guilty
unequivocally
Article 66: Arrest and detention
Article 67: Instruction to the suspect
comply with a set of conditions during
investigations
Article 68: Rights of the suspect
Article 69: Detention facilities
Article 70: Monitoring a suspect through
technology
Article 71: Investigation on the background
of the suspect
Article 72: Statement
Article
73:
investigations
Confidentiality
during

CHAPTER IV: DETENTION AND
PROVISIONAL RELEASE BY A JUDGE
Section One: Filing a case claiming for
provisional detention
Article 74: Prosecution’s case file on
provisional detention
Article 75: Notification of a case file on
provisional detention to the suspect
Section 2: Hearing on provisional detention
Article 76: Duties of a judge during hearing
on provisional detention
Article 77: Time limits for Decision on
provisional detention and release
Article 78: Contents of the judgment on
provisional detention and release
Article 79: Duration of a provisional
detention order
Section 3: Provisional release and bail

Article 80: Instruction to respect certain
conditions
Article 81: Bail
Article 82: Offences subject to bail
Article 83: Types of bail and where it
deposited
Article 84: Determination of bail
Article 85: Bail refund
Section 4: Appealing against an order
provisional detention or provisional release
Article 86: Court with which to file an appeal
Article 87: Procedure and time limits for
appealing against an order of provisional
detention or provisional release
Article 88:
submission
Contents
of
the
appeal’s
Article 89: Upholding the status quo of the
suspect

Article 90: Prohibition of re-detention
person who has been provisionally released
Article 91: Application for release
TITLE III: PROSECUTION OF THE
ACCUSED BEFORE THE COURTS
CHAPTER ONE: PROSECUTION OF THE
ACCUSED AT THE FIRST INSTANCE
Section One: Filing a case before the court
Article 92: Seizing a court by public
prosecution
Article 93: Indictment
Article 94: Reception of defence submissions
Article 95: Court’s initiative to take up a case
Section 2: Status of the accused and
application for provisional release when the
court is seized to hear the case on its merits

Article 96: Status of the accused when the
court is seized to hear the case on its merits
Article 97: Application for provisional
release
Article 98: Summons to appear before court
Article 99: Modalities of summons by public
notice
Article 100: Proof of summons by public
notice
Article 101: Summons addressed
organisations and legal entities
Article 102: Summoning a person with
known or unknown residence or domicile
abroad
Article 103: Time limits for the appearance
of the accused or the person liable for
damages
Article 104: Reduction of the period
appear

Article 105: Time limits for appearance
case of a summons by mail, by a messenger
or by posting in an appropriate place
Article 106: Summoning co-offenders
accomplices that were not brought before the
court
Section 3: Production of evidence
Article 107: Burden of proof
Article 108: Basis for the production
evidence
Article 109: Collection of evidence
Article 110 Receiving and examining
evidence produced by the parties
Article 111: Benefit of doubt to the accused
Section 4: Civil action arising from an
offence
Article 112: Competent court to try a civil
action
Article 113: Trying a civil action

Article 114: Separating a civil action from
criminal action
Article 115: Suspension of proceedings
civil action
Article 116: Time to file a civil action
Article 117: Withdrawal of a civil action
within criminal proceedings
Article 118: Private prosecution
Article 119: Identification of acts the accused
is alleged to have committed
Article 120: Filing a claim by way of private
prosecution
Article 121: Discontinuance of a claim
submitted by way of private prosecution
Article 122: Civil action arising from an
offence
Section 5: Appearance of parties
Article 123: Appearance in person of the
accused person

Article 124: Appearance of a person liable
for damages and claimant for damages
Section 6: Pre-trial session
Article 125: Preliminary hearing
Section 7: Conduct of the hearing
Article 126: Guiding principles of criminal
cases
Article 127: Procedure for conducting the
hearing
Article 128: Trial in absentia or in the
absence of the public prosecution
Article 129: Amicus curiae
Article 130: Time and place for the conduct
of hearing
Article 131: Order of the court to conduct
hearing in camera
Article 132: Records by the court registrar
Article 133: Conduct required of a person
speaking at the hearing

Article 134: Dress code that conforms to the
honour of the court
Article 135: Order during the hearing
Article 136: Audio and visual recording
court hearing
Article 137: Trial of offences of contempt
court
Section 8: Pronouncement of the judgement
Article 138: Time for pronouncement
judgment
Article 139: Contents of the judgment
Article 140: Fate of bail in case of acquittal
or conviction of the accused
Article 141: Obligation of indicating the
competent court
Article 142: Notification of a judgment
pronounced in absentia

CHAPTER II: SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Section One: Procedure for trying a case on
unlawful detention
Article 143: Unlawful detention
Article 144: Procedure for instituting a claim
against unlawful detention
Article 145: Decision on claim against
unlawful detention
Section 2: Prosecution of a juvenile offender
Article 146: Determination of minority of
juvenile offender
Article 147: Prosecuting a juvenile offender
Article 148: Trial of a minor and his or her
co-accused
Article 149: Detention of a minor under
prosecution

Article 150: Decision that can be taken
against a juvenile offender
Article 151: Right to legal counsel
Article 152: Measure taken by the specialised
chamber for minors
Article 153: Civil action against a minor
Section 3: Prosecution of an offence
committed outside the territory of the
Republic of Rwanda
Article 154: Prosecution of a Rwandan who
commits an offence outside the territory
the Republic of Rwanda
Article 155: Prosecution of a felony or
misdemeanour committed abroad
Article 156: Prosecuting
committed in no man’s land
an
offence
Article 157: International or transnational
crimes

Article 158: Proceedings for international
transnational crimes
Article 159: Prosecution of an offence
committed against Rwanda or against
Rwandan national outside the territory
the Republic of Rwanda
Section 4: Prosecution and trial of a fugitive
suspect
Article 160: Fugitive suspect
Article 161: Publication of the order
Article 162: Trial of a fugitive suspect
Article 163: Non representation of a fugitive
suspect
Article 164: Confiscation or seizure of the
property of a convicted fugitive
Article 165: Publication of the extract of the
judgement

Article 166: Loss of civil rights
Article 167: Prosecution of the co-accused
an accused fugitive
Article 168: Resumption of prosecution of
fugitive
Article 169: Retrial of a fugitive
Section 5: Prosecution of persons with
privilege of jurisdiction and that of Members
of Parliament
Sub-Section One: Prosecution of persons
with privilege of jurisdiction
Article 170: Persons with privilege
jurisdiction
Article 171: Grounds for the privilege
jurisdiction and time of consideration
Sub-Section 2: Prosecution of Members
Parliament
Article 172: Procedure for prosecuting
members of Parliament

CHAPTER III: APPEAL PROCEDURE
Section One: Appeal procedure
Sub-section One: Opposition of a case
decided in absentia
Article 173: Opposition of a case decided
absentia
Article 174: Time limits for filing opposition
Article 175: Admissibility of an opposition
Article 176: Appearance of a person who
files an opposition
Article 177: Non- appearance of a person
who files an opposition
Article 178: Interruption of the execution
a judgment in respect of which an opposition
was filed
Article 179: Effects of the admissibility
opposition filed by an accused tried
absentia

Subsection 2: Appeal
Article 180: Right to appeal
Article 181: Time limits for filing an appeal
Article 182: Appeal procedure
Article 183: Content of written submission
support of appeal
written
Article 184: Reaction to the
submission in support of appeal
Article 185: Release notwithstanding appeal
Article 186: Accused tried while free
Article 187: Remaining
notwithstanding appeal
Article 188: Effects of appeal
in
detention
Article 189: Withdrawal and writing off an
appeal
Article 190: Appeal against the civil
conviction in case of acquittal of the accused

Article 191: Appeal of the offender required
to pay damages
Article 192: Annulment of an admitted case
considered through procedures contrary
the law
Article 193: Ordering the court to try the
case it refused to admit
Article 194: Not using two appeal procedures
at
the
same
time
Section 2: Special appeal procedures
Subsection One: Application for review
Article 195: Definition of review
Article 196: Persons who can apply for
review
Article 197: Grounds for case review
Article 198: Competent court to review the
case

Article 199: Filing an action for case review
Article 200: Admissibility of case review
Article 201: Execution of a judgment during
case review
Article 202: Impossibility of appeal for
ruling made on case review
Article 203: Time limit for application for
review
CHAPTER IV: USE OF INTERPRETERS,
TRANSLATORS,
EXPERTS
AND
MEDICAL DOCTORS
Article 204: Language of the court
Article 205: Translator, expert, interpreter
or medical doctor
Article 206: Determination of trial costs
Article 207: Criteria for determining trial
costs

Article 208: Oath of an expert, interpreter,
translator or medical doctor
Article 209: Appointment of an interpreter
an expert, a translator or a medical doctor
Article 210: Requirements for an expert and
his/her report
Article 211: Receiving testimony from people
other than the suspect
Article 212: Contradictory opinions
several experts
Article 213: Seeking a second opinion from
another expert
TITLE
IV:
JUDGMENTS
EXECUTION
CHAPTER ONE:
COURT DECISION
EXECUTION
OF
OF
Section One: General provisions
Article 214: Execution of judgments
Article 215: Voluntary execution of
judgment

Article 216: Persons responsible for the
execution of judgments
Article 217: Release of an accused person
who is acquitted
Article 218: Provisional execution of
judgment
Article 219: Foreign criminal judgment
Article 220: Decision of dissolution of
private institution or organisation with legal
personality
Section 2: Imprisonment
Article 221: Serving imprisonment penalty
Article 222: Detention facilities for women
and minors
Section 3: Fine and court fees
Article 223: Payment of fine and court fees
Article 224: Injunction to pay within the
prescribed time limits

Section 4: Penalty of community service
Article 225: Modalities for the execution of
penalty of community service
CHAPTER
II:
GROUNDS
FOR
SUSPENSION OF THE EXECUTION OF
PENALTY AND REMOVAL OF
PENALTY
Section One: Grounds for suspension of the
execution of penalty
Article 226: Grounds for suspension of the
execution of penalty
Subsection One: Presidential pardon
Article 227: Prerogative of pardon of the
President of the Republic
Article 228: Presidential pardon
application by a convicted person
on
Article 229: Collective pardon granted by the
President of the Republic

Article 230: Instrument through which
presidential pardon is granted
Article 231: Modalities for implementing
presidential pardon
Subsection 2: Release on parole of the
convicted person
Article 232: Grounds for release on parole
Article 233: Period of imprisonment to
completed before applying for release on
parole
Article 234: Application procedure for
release on parole
Article 235: Revocation of release on parole
Article 236: Effects of revocation of release
on parole
Article 237: Full enjoyment of freedom
Article 238: Limitation period for the
execution of penalties

Section 3: Suspension of a penalty
Article 239: Suspension of execution
penalties
Article 240: Suspended penalty considered
null and void
Article 241: Effects of suspension of penalty
Section 2: Grounds for removal of a penalty
Subsection One: Amnesty
Article 242: Definition of amnesty
Article 243: Effects of amnesty
Article 244: Amnesty subject to conditions
Subsection 2: Rehabilitation
Article 245: Person who can be rehabilitated
Article 246: Time required before applying
for rehabilitation

Article 247: Conditions for rehabilitation
Article 248: Determining the pecuniary
amount to be paid by a person applying for
rehabilitation
Article 249: Disposal of the pecuniary
amount that is not received by a person
whom it is awarded
Article 250: Applying for rehabilitation
Article 251: Decision on the application for
rehabilitation
Article 252: Effects of rehabilitation
Article 253: Revocation of rehabilitation
CHAPTER III: COURT FEES
Section One: Deposit of court fees
Article 254: Determination and deposit
court fees

Article 255: Court fees for a case tried at the
first instance
Article 256:Court fees in case of appeal
Article 257: Exemption from depositing
court fees when filing a case
Article 258: Calculation of court fees
Article 259: Court fees withheld
Section 2: Rate of court fees
Article 260: Cost of documents served by
courts
TITLE V: MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL
PROVISIONS
CHAPTER ONE:
PROVISIONS
MISCELLANEOUS
Article 261: Time limits provided under laws
relating to criminal procedure
Article 262: Time limits counted in days
hours

Article 263: Counting periods fixed
months and years
Article 264: Applying civil procedure
criminal matters
CHAPTER II: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 265: Drafting, consideration and
adoption of this Law
Article 266: Repealing provision
Article 267: Commencement

LAW Nº 027/2019 OF 19/09/2019
RELATING
TO
THE
CRIMINAL
PROCEDURE
We, KAGAME Paul,
President of the Republic;
THE PARLIAMENT HAS ADOPTED AND
WE SANCTION, PROMULGATE THE
FOLLOWING LAW AND ORDER IT BE
PUBLISHED
IN
THE
OFFICIAL
GAZETTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF
RWANDA
THE PARLIAMENT:
The Chamber of Deputies, in its session of
June 2019 ;
Pursuant to the Constitution of the Republic
Rwanda of 2003 revised in 2015 especially
Articles 14, 23, 24, 26, 29, 64, 68, 69, 70, 88,
90, 91, 106,120 and 176;

Having reviewed Law nº 30/2013 of 24/5/2013
relating to the code of criminal procedure;
ADOPTS:
TITLE ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER
ONE:
PROVISIONS
PRELIMINARY
Article One: Purpose of this Law
This Law governs acts of investigation,
prosecution, trial and execution of penalties for
offences provided for by criminal Law.
Article 2: Scope of application
Unless otherwise provided by law, laws
criminal procedure apply during investigations,
prosecution, in courts and in organs in charge
judgment execution.

Article 3: Definitions
In this Law, the following terms are defined
follows:
1° criminal action: an action filed
behalf of the public before criminal
courts and aimed at punishing the
offender;
2° civil action: an action filed to seek
compensation for damages caused
the offence. The action solely intends
seek civil damages. It is instituted
accordance with procedures under this
Law;
3° prosecution: any act aimed
instituting legal proceedings in the
court, summoning parties and appearing
before court, preparing the hearing,
litigating and using appeal procedures;
4° serious grounds for suspecting
person of an offence: plausible
investigation acts leading to the
suspicion that the suspect has
committed an offence;

5° investigation: any act that aims
detecting offences, gathering evidence,
whether of an incriminating
exculpatory nature and any act that aims
at determining whether to prosecute
not to prosecute the suspect;
6° a person caught red-handed: a person
caught during the course of committing
an offence or immediately after
committing the offence;
7° national security: any strategies
applied by the State with objective
protecting
the
State
including
prevention of and fight against any
inside or external aggression and any
other acts that may threaten the State;
8° a person presumed to be caught red-
handed: a person being yelled at by the
public or who the public finds with
arms, instruments, documents or any
other objects upon which he or she
suspected to be a perpetrator of
offence or an accomplice provided that
it is soon after the offence.

CHAPTER II: ACTIONS ARISING FROM
AN OFFENCE
Section One: Criminal action
Article 4: Competent authority to institute
criminal action
A criminal action is instituted by the public
prosecution.
However, the action referred to in Paragraph
One of this Article may be instituted by
aggrieved person by filing a suit in a criminal
court by way of private prosecution.
Article 5: Grounds for termination
criminal action
The criminal action is terminated due to the
following grounds:
1° death of the offender;
2° expiry of prescriptive period of the
offence;
3° if amnesty is granted;
4° if a Law is repealed;

5° if a judgment on the action becomes
final.
The criminal action may also be terminated due
to the following grounds:
1° the suspect accepts to pay a fine without
trial;
2° the plaintiff accepts to withdraw the
claim as may be specified by Law.
Article 6: Prescription of a criminal action
Except offences that are not subject
prescription as provided by Law, criminal
action for other offences lapses:
1° after a period of ten (10) years for
felonies;
2° after a period of three (3) years for
misdemeanours;
3° after a period of one (1) year for petty
offences.

Article 7: Time of commencement of the
prescriptive period of a criminal action
The prescriptive period for a criminal action
starts to run from the date on which the offence
was committed if during that time
investigation or prosecution was conducted.
For instantaneous offences, the prescriptive
period of a criminal action runs from the date
which the offence was committed.
For continuing offences, the prescriptive period
of a criminal action runs from the time of the
cessation of such an act.
As to several acts intended to fulfil the same
criminal intent, the prescriptive period of
criminal action runs from the commission of the
last act.
Article 8: Interruption of the prescriptive
period of a criminal action
The prescriptive period of a criminal action
interrupted by conducting investigation

prosecution within the period provided for
under Article 6 of this Law.
If any investigation or prosecution is conducted
during that period, the prescriptive period of
criminal action starts running again from the
last investigation or prosecution act to the
expiry of the prescribed prescriptive period.
The same applies to the persons named in the
complaint but who have not been subject
investigation or any other form of prosecution.
Article 9: Grounds for suspension of the
prescriptive period of an action
The prescriptive period of a criminal action
suspended
whenever
investigation
prosecution is precluded by an inevitable
obstacle arising from the Law or by an event
force majeure.
When such an obstacle is removed, the
prescriptive period which was suspended
continues to run from the removal of the
obstacle.

Section 2: Civil action
Article 10: Person empowered to institute
civil action
A civil action may be instituted by any person
aggrieved by an offence. The person may
natural or legal, whether public or private or any
other person authorised by Law.
However, legally constituted organisations
whose mission is to defend victims of offence
or competent government institutions entrusted
by Law may act on behalf of the victim
institute a civil action.
Article 11: Person against whom a civil
action is instituted
A civil action can be instituted against the
principal offender, co-offender, accomplice and
any other person with civil liability.
A civil action can also be instituted against the
offender’s heirs.

Article 12: Prescription of a civil action
A civil action arising from a criminal offence
prescribes after a period of five (5) years from
the date on which the offence was committed.
However, if the prescription of a civil action
due before the prescription of the criminal
action, the civil action prescribes at the same
time with the criminal action.
Article 13: Failure to institute a civil action
A civil action cannot be instituted before
criminal court if the prescription period of the
criminal action expired.
However, if a civil action was instituted before
a criminal court, the court may continue to hear
the civil case even if the prescription period
the criminal action expired while the action was
still pending in the court, the defendant died, the
offence is no longer punishable under the Law
or even if the amnesty was granted.

Article 14: Waiver of a civil action
The waiver of a civil action does not
discontinue prosecution.
TITLE II: INVESTIGATION
CHAPTER ONE: INVESTIGATION OF
THE
ORGAN
IN
CHARGE
OF
INVESTIGATION
Article 15: Functions of the organ in charge
of investigation
Investigators carry out their functions under the
supervision and in accordance with the
instructions of the National Public Prosecution
Authority in respect to the offences under
investigations.
Military investigators work under the authority
and supervision of the Military Prosecutor
General.
Non-career investigators work under the
authority and supervision of the organs under
the authority of which they are. However,
they are executing investigatory duties,
provisions of this Law apply.

An Order of the Minister in charge of justice
may confer upon an officer of State organ the
power of non-career investigator.
Investigators discharge their investigatory
duties only on offences falling under their
authority and in their respective jurisdiction.
Article 16: Responsibilities of investigators
In their duties of investigation, investigators are
responsible for:
1° detecting offences;
2° receiving complaints and documents
relating to offences;
3° gathering incriminating and exculpatory
evidence;
4° searching for perpetrators of offences,
their co-offenders and accomplices
order to be prosecuted by the public
prosecution.
When conducting investigation, an investigator
can move to the arrest or detention of a suspect
in accordance with procedures under this Law.

An investigator writes a statement of arrest and
detention and reserves a copy to the suspect.
Article 17: Powers to investigate
Investigation is carried out by the public
prosecution with assistance of the organ
charge of investigation.
However, preliminary investigations are carried
out by the organ in charge of investigations,
own motion, on complaint or under instructions
of public prosecution.
If the organ in charge of investigation is seized
and rejects the complaint or refuses to conduct
investigations without any justification, the
claimant may directly file the complaint with
the public prosecution. In that case, the public
prosecution
may
conduct
preliminary
investigations after verifying whether the organ
in charge of investigation was seized and failed
to act.
The public prosecution may also conduct
preliminary investigations in case it believes
there are subjects that had to be investigated but
were not investigated.

Article 18: Procedure for filing a complaint
with the organ in charge of investigation
Filing a case with the organ in charge
investigation can be done either orally or
writing.
If it is done orally, the organ in charge
investigation must put it in a written statement
and the complainant affixes his/her signature
fingerprint on the statement after reading it
after the statement has been read for him or her.
Article 19: Preserving evidence
An investigator must preserve evidence that
likely to disappear and any material that may
help in ascertaining the truth.
Unauthorized person is prohibited from altering
the condition of the scene of crime as well
removing any material from the scene before
investigator initiates investigations.
However, for safety reasons or in order
rescue the victim of the offence, it may
necessary to alter the condition of the scene
crime or to remove certain pieces of evidence.

Article 20: Summons by an investigator
A person summoned by an investigator for the
purposes of investigation is required to appear.
In case of failure to appear, he or she can
compelled to appear upon presenting to him
her of warrant signed by the prosecutor.
Article 21: Contents of the statement that
concludes preliminary investigations
The statement that concludes preliminary
investigations consists of the following:
1 º the number of the investigation file;
2 º legal provisions on which the
investigator bases while submitting the
file to the prosecution;
3 º names of the investigator who prepared
the file and his/her place of work;
4 º identity of the plaintiff if applicable,
5 º identity of the defendant;
6 º identities of witnesses;

7 º the offence under prosecution and the
legal provisions that punish it;
8 º how each offence was committed and
constituent elements;
9 º proof of commission of every offence
and the role of every suspect in
commission;
10 º the list of seized property;
11 º consulted experts;
12 º conclusion of the investigator;
13 º list of items contained in the file;
14 º oath of the investigator worded
follows: “I swear that this record
authentic”;
15 º names and
investigator.
signature
Article 22: Submission of a case file
of
the
After completion of the investigations, the
organ in charge of investigations immediately
submits the file to the public prosecution.

CHAPTER II: INVESTIGATION OF THE
PUBLIC PROSECUTION
Article 23: Persons who are competent
conduct prosecution
Powers to prosecute before a court belong to the
public prosecution. However, the victim of the
offence may prosecute before the court
prescribed by Law.
Article 24: Obligations of a prosecutor upon
receipt of the case file
When the prosecutor receives the file, he or she
may:
1° immediately file the case of the suspect
a competent court if he or she believes
that the file is complete;
2° decide
to
conduct
additional
investigations in case he or she believes
that the evidence contained in the case
file is insufficient;
3° initiate formalities for negotiations
between the suspect and victim if he
she believes that it is the sole procedure
to remedy the victim, nullify the
consequences of the
offence and

facilitate rehabilitation of the offender.
The procedure does not apply to offences
punishable with imprisonment exceeding
two (2) years. However, when the suspect
is a minor, the negotiation can also apply
to the offences punishable by a maximum
term of imprisonment of five (5) years;
4° impose a fine without any proceedings.
there is a victim of the offence who may
ask for compensation, the prosecutor
summons him or her in order to help him
or her negotiate with the suspect about the
amount of the compensation. In case
disagreement, the victim of the offence
files a claim of compensation to the
competent court;
5° to initiate plea bargaining;
6° close the file if the prosecutor believes
that the elements that constitute
offence are incomplete or if the
perpetrators of the offence are unknown
or if the prosecutor believes that
prosecution is unnecessary;

7° release the suspect or release him or her
and instruct him or her to comply with
set of conditions.
The closure of the file referred to under Item
of Paragraph One is an administrative decision,
which cannot prejudice the continuation
investigations in case the public prosecution
discovers any other incriminating evidence
provided there is no prescription period of the
offence in the meantime. The victim of the
offence and the suspect must be informed of the
decision within thirty (30) days from the day
is taken.
Article 25: Fine without trial
For any offence that falls within his/her
competence, if the prosecutor considers that the
offence may be punishable by a fine, he or she
may ask the suspect to choose between being
brought before the court or paying a fine
without trial, which fine cannot exceed the
maximum fine increased by any possible
additional amount stipulated by Law.
If the suspect decides to pay the fine without
trial, the criminal action against the suspect
discontinued. The decision is notified to the
victim.

The payment of fine does not constitute
admission of guilt.
Article 26: Plea bargaining
At the end of the suspect’s interrogation, the
prosecutor may propose a plea bargaining
agreement whereby the suspect helps the
prosecutor to obtain all the necessary
information in the prosecution of the offence
and to know other persons involved in the
commission of the offence and in return of some
benefits but without hindering good
administration of justice. The prosecutor
undertakes to make concessions to the suspect
in relation to charges against him or her and the
penalties that he or she may request.
During investigations, a suspect who enters into
plea bargaining with the prosecution may
prosecuted while free.
Plea bargaining does not prevent the victim
the offence from getting information on the
prosecution file and from contributing to the
explanation on the commission of the offence.

Article 27: Effects of plea bargaining
In case of an agreement of plea bargaining, the
public prosecution charges the suspect
agreed on by both parties.
The court may admit or reject an agreement
plea bargaining but cannot alter the agreement.
In case the agreement is admitted, the court,
while taking a decision, considers the
agreement on plea bargaining concluded
between the public prosecution and the accused.
Article 28: Procedures for summoning
suspect
A prosecutor in charge of case file preparation
may summon a suspect by issuing one of the
following documents:
1º a summons;
2º a warrant to appear;
3º a warrant to bring by force;

Warrants referred to in Paragraph One of this
Article are enforceable throughout the entire
country.
A prosecutor in charge of case file preparation
may request the Prosecutor General or the
Military Prosecutor General in case of persons
prosecuted by military courts, to issue
international arrest warrant against a suspect
who is in a foreign country.
Article 29: Summons
A summons is a written notice issued by
investigator or a prosecutor to a person
mentioned therein requesting him or her
appear before a prosecutor or an investigator
a date and at time therein specified.
If possible and where proof may be available
that the summons has been duly issued to the
concerned person, the summons may be served
to the concerned person by means
information and communication technology.

Article 30: Warrant to appear
A warrant to appear is a written notice issued
an investigator or a prosecutor to compel the
person therein mentioned to appear before him
or her on a date and at a time specified.
A warrant to appear does not constitute an order
of arrest or detention. It is rather a document
issued to a person who does not appear after
having received the summons provided for
under Article 29 of this Law.
A warrant to appear is issued to a suspect,
accused person or a witness in a case,
irrespective of the gravity of the offence.
Article 31: Warrant to bring by force
A warrant to bring by force is a written order
issued by a prosecutor to Law enforcement
officers to bring by force a person who
suspected to have committed an offence or
person who refuses to appear after being legally
summoned by an investigator or a prosecutor.

A warrant to bring by force is not an order
detention but rather an order to apprehend the
suspect. A warrant to bring by force is valid for
three (3) months from the date it is signed.
If the period mentioned in Paragraph 2 of this
Article expires, a warrant to bring by force
ceases to be enforceable upon its expiry unless
it is renewed by the issuing authority.
If, for any reason whatsoever, the issuing
authority is absent, the warrant to bring by force
is renewed by the chief prosecutor of the
operating area of the issuing authority.
The warrant to bring by force can also be issued
against any escaped detainee.
If the wanted person is arrested, he or she
immediately brought before the officer who
ordered the arrest. If he or she cannot
immediately brought before that officer, he
she is provisionally detained within a period not
exceeding five (5) days in a relevant custody
facility within the jurisdiction of the nearest
investigator.

Article 32: Summoning a witness
A prosecutor summons any person whose
testimony he or she considers relevant to appear
by issuing a summons or a warrant to appear.
Any person so summoned is given a copy
such a document.
Witnesses
are
summoned
through
administrative entities by court bailiffs
security organs. However, they may appear
their own initiative.
Any person duly summoned must appear.
Article 33: A warrant to bring by force
issued against a witness who refuses
appear
A prosecutor may issue a warrant to bring
force against any witness who refuses to appear
on his/her own initiative or on the request of
investigator.
A witness who is legally summoned and does
not appear with no justifiable reason or refuses
to testify when required to do so, may
brought before the court and face the penalties

provided for by law determining offences and
penalties in general.
A witness who fails to appear after a second
summons or a warrant to bring by force is issued
does not face penalties if he or she has
justifiable grounds.
When a witness cannot appear before
prosecutor for legitimate reasons, the
prosecutor interrogates the witness from the
place of the witness or the prosecutor may
delegate another person for that assignment.
Article 34: Remission of penalty for a witness
facing penalties for refusal to appear
A witness sentenced for refusal to appear who
is summoned once again or is subject to
warrant to bring by force and gives legitimate
reasons for failure to appear, he or she may
benefit from remission of the penalty previously
imposed by the court.
Article 35: Provisional arrest warrant issued
by a prosecutor
A provisional arrest warrant is an order
detention signed by a prosecutor in the course

of case file preparation after the suspect
informed of the charges against him or her.
A provisional arrest warrant is valid for five (5)
days non-renewable.
Article 36: International arrest warrant
An international arrest warrant is an order
signed by the Prosecutor General or Military
Prosecutor General issued against a person in
foreign country suspected of having committed
a felony or a misdemeanour.
Article 37: Enforcement of a warrant
bring by force and arrest warrant
A warrant to bring by force and arrest warrant
are enforced by any Law enforcement officer
and must be shown to the persons against whom
they are issued and such persons are given
copy of the warrant.
The original or copy of a warrant to bring
force or an arrest warrant is immediately sent
the person responsible for its enforcement.

Article 38: Interception of communication
investigations and prosecution
During investigations and prosecutions and for
purposes of ascertaining the truth
commission of offences against national
security, offences of corruption and offences
embezzlement of State property, authorities
State security organs specified by the
Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda, Office
of the Ombudsman and Rwanda Investigation
Bureau may, under written authorization issued
by the Prosecutor General listen, understand
and audio or video record documents, internet,
discussions, telegram, postal cards, high tech
communication and any other mode
communication on offences referred to in this
Article during communication.
The applicant for authorisation referred to under
Paragraph One of this Article must clearly
prove to the Prosecutor General the link
between the requested authorization to intercept
communication and the offence subject
prosecution.

Article 39: Order for interception
communication and correspondences and
note taking
An order for interception of communications
and correspondences must be in writing. The
order must contain identification elements
items that must be seized or connections that
must be intercepted and to indicate the offence
that gives rise to use such a procedure. The
order is issued within forty-eight (48) hours
from the time the Prosecutor General receives
the request for interception of communication.
However, in case of urgency, the Prosecutor
General may issue a verbal order authorizing
interception of communication but the written
order must be issued within a period not
exceeding twenty-four (24) hours.
The order mentioned in this Article is valid for
a period of three (3) months renewable only
once.
Article 40: Statement of interception
communications and correspondences
The organ conducting interception
communications and correspondences writes
related statement. Such a statement only
includes details on the offence alleged against

the person with respect to whom interception
conducted.
Article 41: Prohibitions regarding seizure
interception
Correspondence or messages of the Head
State are neither seized nor intercepted.
Article 42: Assistance in investigation
The prosecutor in charge of case file preparation
may request another Prosecutor or
investigator from another jurisdiction
perform on his/her behalf acts he or she
considers necessary for the ascertainment of the
truth. The assistance in investigation only
covers acts relating to the alleged offence.
The Prosecutor in charge of case file
preparation may also request a prosecutor in
foreign country to provide assistance
performing on his/her behalf the acts provided
for under Paragraph One of this Article through
the Prosecutor General who in turn submits the
request through the Minister in charge
foreign affairs, and sends a copy to the Minister
in charge of justice.

The Prosecutor General may also give
prosecutor at the Intermediate and Primary level
extra-territorial
powers
to
conduct
investigations.
Article 43: Competence of a prosecutor
delegated investigator
A prosecutor or an investigator delegated
provide assistance in the investigation has the
same competence as that of the prosecutor who
delegated him or her only in matters under
limits of delegation.
CHAPTER III: COMMON PROVISIONS
ON INVESTIGATION BETWEEN THE
ORGAN
IN
CHARGE
OF
INVESTIGATION AND THE PUBLIC
PROSECUTION
Article 44: Visiting the scene of crime
If an investigator becomes aware of the
commission of an offence, he or she may
immediately visit the scene of crime if possible
and take note of how the offence was
committed.

If the offence committed is a felony or
misdemeanour, the investigator informed of the
offence immediately informs the public
prosecution or any other organ or agency that
supervises him or her.
The prosecutor may also visit the scene of crime
in order to see how the offence was committed.
Article 45: Interrogation
In case the suspect appears for the first time, the
investigator or prosecutor verifies his/her
personal particulars and informs him or her
the charges against him or her and their legal
characterization and it is recorded in
statement.
An investigator or prosecutor interrogates
suspect and makes a written record of the
statement made by the suspect. Interrogation
conducted in the language the suspect
understands well.
The investigator or prosecutor may also
interrogate any person presumed to have some
clarification and requests him or her to give
testimony under oath in the manner provided for
under Article 47 of this Law.

The investigator or prosecutor may also prevent
any person from moving away from a specified
area and, if necessary, compels him or her
stay in that area until the completion of the
interrogation scheduled for the day concerned.
At the end of interrogation, the suspect
interrogated person must disclose his/her
residential address. He or she is informed that
he or she is required to notify the investigator
prosecutor in charge of investigation of any
change of residential address, failing which any
notification sent to his/her former address
considered duly served on him or her. Such
notification and the residential address are
recorded in a statement.
Article 46: Rights of the suspect during
interrogation
An investigator or a prosecutor notifies the
suspect of his/her right to legal counsel and
have private communication with him or her.
The notification is recorded in a statement.
If a suspect is unable to get a legal counsel, the
investigator or the prosecutor informs the
President of the Bar Association for him or her
to assign a legal counsel to the suspect. The

suspect who is assigned a legal counsel
provided for in this paragraph cannot refuse the
counsel without substantial reasons.
If the suspect is a child, he or she is entitled to
legal counsel.
The legal counsel is allowed to consult the case
file in Public Prosecution.
Article 47: Witness oath
After giving their particulars, witnesses are
interrogated one by one without the presence
the suspect. With his/her right hand raised, the
witness takes the following oath: “I....................
swear to tell the truth. Should I fail to honour
this oath, may I face the rigours of the Law”.
A witness who refuses to take the oath or lies
after taking the oath to tell the truth is liable
the penalties as provided for by the Law
determining offences and penalties in general.
Statements made by a witness are recorded in
statement.

Article 48: Testimony of a person having
participated in the commission of an offence
or a victim of offence
Any person having participated in the
commission of an offence or a victim of offence
may be heard as a witness.
Article 49: Minor’s testimony
A minor aged under fourteen (14) years
qualified to testify as an adult.
A minor aged under fourteen (14) years gives
testimony without taking an oath but the court
ruling cannot solely rely on his/her testimony.
In that case, the testimony of the minor must
supported by other corroborative evidence.
Article 50: Modalities for writing a statement
A statement must be written with enough
spacing between lines and words. Struck out
and altered words must be approved by the
investigator or prosecutor and the person
interrogated. Words that are not approved
the investigator or prosecutor and the person
interrogated become invalid. The same applies
to statements that are not duly signed.

Article 51: Signing the statement
Each page of the statement is signed by the
prosecutor or investigator and the person
interrogated. The person interrogated is asked
to read and sign or affix his/her fingerprint
his/her statement put in writing if he or she
agrees to its contents. If he or she is unable
read, the statement is read to him or her.
If he or she refuses or is unable to sign or affix
his/her fingerprint, his/her refusal or inability
recorded in the statement.
Article 52: Confrontation
The investigator or prosecutor in charge of case
file preparation, either on own initiative or upon
request by any interested party may organize
confrontation between the suspects themselves,
between witnesses or between the suspect and
witnesses, between the victim and witnesses
between the offender and the victim of the
offence. Every confrontation is subject to
statement.

Article 53: Urgent
confrontation
interrogation
The investigator or prosecutor may urgently
conduct interrogation or confrontation if he
she has reason to believe that evidence can
disappear. The causes of urgency are recorded
in a statement.
Article 54: Rights of the victim during
interrogation
To protect the victim’s privacy during
interrogation, special attention must be paid
the following with respect to the victim:
1° to be interrogated in the presence of
trusted person of his or her choice;
2° to be informed of his or her right to remain
silent ;
3° his or her right to be informed about the
legal provisions which concern him or her;
4° his or her right not to be confronted by the
offender if he or she is a minor aged under
eighteen(18) years;

5° his or her right to be protected if he or she
expresses concern for his or her safety or
relevant organs consider that his or her
safety may be compromised.
Article 55: Search
If an investigator finds that evidence required
made up of papers, documents and any other
items held by the suspect or any other person,
he or she may, with a search warrant from the
public prosecution, search the place where such
items are kept.
The prosecutor in charge of case file preparation
may also conduct a search at the scene of the
offence or at any other place where any
evidence necessary for the determination of the
truth may be found. The prosecutor may assign
such functions to the investigator.
If a search is intended to be conducted in
home, it can neither be conducted before six (6)
a.m. nor after six (6) p.m.
However, if the suspect is caught red-handed
is presumed to have been caught red-handed,

the requirement for the investigator to obtain
search warrant or observe search hours may not
be complied with. Search is always conducted
in presence of the representatives of the local
authorities of the place of search.
The search is conducted in the presence of the
suspect or household members. Their absence
cannot prevent the conduct of search.
If the investigator or prosecutor is required
search an office of a person with a private
profession, the search is conducted in the
presence of that person under search or his
her duly authorized representative. However,
the person under search is absent and he or she
has no duly authorized representative, nothing
prevents the search from being conducted.
If the person under search is a member of
professional association, the search
conducted in the presence of the representative
of the association.
An investigator or a prosecutor who concludes
any search is required to prepare a search
statement.

Article 56: Conducting body search or
body cavity search
During evidence collection, an investigator or
prosecutor may conduct a body search or body
cavity search of a suspect with the help of
qualified person or through appropriate
technology.
Unless the person is caught red-handed,
investigator or a prosecutor cannot conduct
strip-search or a body cavity search without
prior authorisation of the Chief Prosecutor
the prosecution organ where he or she works.
strip-search or body cavity search is conducted
exclusively by a medical doctor.
A strip-search or a body cavity search subject
may choose a medical doctor, his/her spouse
any other adult person to accompany him or her.
Article 57: Seizure and caveat of objects
An investigator or a prosecutor may seize
objects or put caveat on immovable asset
wherever they are and in any way if the
confiscation is carried out in accordance with
the Law and such other items that may serve

incriminating or exculpatory evidence against
the suspect.
An investigator or a prosecutor may also, for the
purpose of conducting investigation
committed offence or preventing the offence
from being committed, freeze bank accounts,
business shares or their interests in order
collect evidence on the offence. The seizure
provided for under this Paragraph cannot
exceed a period of thirty (30) days unless the
prosecutor extends such a period to a maximum
of additional thirty (30) days.
Article 58: Management of the seized
property
An investigator or a prosecutor who seizes any
property linked to the offence must preserve
in appropriate warehouse and keep it in a safe
place to avoid any damage that may cause loss
to the owner. Any seized property is subject
analytical statement in relation to the type of the
property and photos of such a property must
taken.
If the property seized may become damages,
depreciate or if the property may pose a serious

danger to people’s health, safety or property, the
investigator or the prosecutor may, on own
initiative or upon request by any interested
person, immediately take any necessary
measures such as returning the property
owner, depositing or placing the property under
suretyship, destroy the property or take any
other appropriate measures. He or she records
in a written statement and reserves a copy of the
statement to the owner of the property.
In case the decision to return the seized property
to the owner is taken but the owner is
available or exceeds a period of one (1) year
without taking the property, the public
prosecution may, in case the prosecutor
believes that the property may perish, expire
depreciate, auction the property and the
proceeds thereof are kept in State treasury until
the owner is available. If the owner is available,
the expenses incurred from the time the decision
to return the property to the owner was taken
the time the property was auctioned are
deducted from the proceeds from the property.
The investigator or prosecutor determines the
place where non destroyed property is kept
pending the hearing.

Article 59: Statement of seizure
A statement of seizure indicates details of the
property seized and is signed by the person who
held the property and witnesses, if any. If the
person who held the property is unavailable,
unable or refuses to sign the statement
seizure, it is mentioned in the statement and
copy given to the person who held the property.
Any statements prepared during seizure as well
as respective attachments are included in the file
of the suspect and their copies are given to the
owner of the property.
Article 60: Authorization to search and visit
any place where evidence may be found
A prosecutor or an investigator vested with
powers to conduct a search and to visit any
place where evidence may be found must
present a valid service card and a search warrant
signed by the competent authority. A copy
the search warrant is given to the suspect
present and the owner of the premises to
searched.

Article 61: Search warrant
A search warrant is an authorization issued
the Public Prosecution upon authorization by:
1° the Prosecutor General;
2° the Military Prosecutor General in case
of members of the military or their co-
offender;
3° a National Prosecutor;
4° a Chief Prosecutor at the Intermediate
level;
5° a Prosecutor at the Primary level.
The warrant provided for under Paragraph One
of this Article empowers the person in charge
its enforcement to enter any premises
mentioned in the document to uncover evidence
or items that may establish the truth in relation
to the offence and the suspect.

Article 62: Knowing the contents of the
search warrants
If the search conducted is related to documents,
the power to know the contents of such
documents before they are seized is entrusted
the following:
1° the Prosecutor in charge of case file
preparation or any other person he or she
delegates; and
2° an investigator.
Article 63: Inventory and marking of the
items seized
Any item and document placed in the custody
of the organ in charge of investigation or the
public prosecution are immediately counted and
marked with a sign indicating seizure. Only
items and documents that may assist in the
establishment of the truth on the offence under
investigations are seized.
Article 64: Statement of visit, search and
seizure
A prosecutor or an investigator having visited
the premises and conducted a search and seizure
writes a statement and give a copy thereof to the
concerned persons.

Article 65: Criminal proceedings against
person caught red-handed, presumed to have
been caught red-handed or who pleads guilty
unequivocally
When a person caught red-handed or presumed
to have been caught red-handed, any person
may, in the absence of an investigator,
immediately arrest and surrender him or her
the nearest investigator.
The investigator to whom the person caught
red-handed or presumed to have been caught
red-handed is surrendered, is required, in
period not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours,
prepare the file and submit it to the competent
prosecutor who decides on the file in a non-
renewable period of five (5) days.
If the prosecutor believes it is appropriate
prosecute a suspect while in provisional
detention, the prosecutor petitions the court
order the suspect to be provisionally detained
until the case is heard on its merits.
The court is required to try the case on its merits
within a period not exceeding fifteen (15) days
from receipt of the criminal case file and the

judgment is required to be pronounced within
five (5) days of the closure of proceedings.
In case the accused pleads guilty unequivocally,
proceedings are conducted in accordance with
Paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 of this Article and the
judge seized in this case may reduce specified
penalties in accordance with the provisions
the Law determining offences and penalties
general.
In case a person had earlier confessed and later
pleads not guilty before the court, the judge,
this case, is not obliged to adjudicate the case
within fifteen (15) days provided for under this
Article.
The time limits referred to in this Article are
respected in case of appeal.
Article 66: Arrest and detention
A suspect normally remains free during
investigation. He or she may be held
provisional detention if there are sufficient
grounds to believe that he or she committed
offence which is punishable with imprisonment
for a term of at least two (2) years.

However, even if the penalty provided for is less
than two (2) years but not less than six (6)
months, the investigator or prosecutor may
provisionally detain the suspect if:
1° there is reason to believe that the suspect
may evade justice;
2° the identity of the suspect is unknown
doubtful;
3° the provisional detention is the only way
to prevent the suspect from disposing
evidence or exerting pressure
witnesses and victims or prevent
collusion between the suspect and their
accomplices;
4° such detention is the only way to protect
the accused, to ensure that the accused
appears before judicial organs whenever
required or to prevent the offence from
continuing or reoccurring.
The investigator or prosecutor, while taking the
decision
to
detain,
considers
other
circumstances related to the conduct and

behaviour of the suspect, the category and the
gravity of the offence or whether the objective
of detaining the suspect may not be achieved
through any other means.
A statement of arrest and detention of the
suspect is valid for five (5) days which cannot
be extended. A copy of such a statement
reserved to the suspect.
A suspect who is arrested is immediately
released if the organ in charge of investigation
or the Public Prosecution finds in the course
investigation that there are no serious grounds
for suspecting him or her of having committed
or attempted to commit an offence. Such
decision is put in writing whose copy
reserved to the suspect.
Article 67: Instruction to the suspect
comply with a set of conditions during
investigation
During investigation, the investigator
prosecutor may, even if he or she believes that
there are serious grounds to suspect that the
suspect committed or attempted to commit the
offence, release a suspect but instruct him or her
to comply with a set of conditions.

Article 68: Rights of the suspect
Any person held in custody by the organ
charge of investigation or public prosecution
must be notified of the charges against him
her and his or her rights including the right
inform his or her legal counsel or any other
person of his or her choice. Such a notification
is made in a statement signed by both the
investigator and the suspect.
Any person held in custody by the organ
charge of investigation or the public
prosecution has the right to a legal counsel and
engage in private communication with him
her.
Any person held in custody has the right to seek
a legal counsel of his or her choice and
allowed to have private communication with
him or her. If he or she is unable to find a legal
counsel, the investigator or the prosecutor
informs the President of the Bar Association
assign a legal counsel to him or her.
Any person held in custody by the organ
charge of investigation or the public
prosecution who is assigned a legal counsel
accordance with the provisions of Paragraph

of this Article cannot refuse the counsel without
justified reasons.
Article 69: Detention facilities
A detainee held by the organ in charge
investigation or the prosecution is in no way
held in prison or in any place other than
appropriate place located within the jurisdiction
of the investigator or the prosecutor, or of the
investigator or the military prosecutor for
members of the military, their co-offenders and
accomplices.
An Order of the Minister in charge of internal
security determines the detention facilities
which the organ in charge of investigation or the
prosecution detains a suspect. An Order of the
Minister in charge of Defence Forces
determines detention facilities in which the
suspect investigated by the Military
investigators is held.
Article 70: Monitoring a suspect through
technology
A suspect
technology.
may
be
monitored
through

An Order of the Minister in charge of justice
determines the modalities through which
suspect may be monitored through technology.
Article 71: Investigation on the background
of the suspect
An investigator or a prosecutor processing the
file does not consider the commission of the
offence only. He or she can also investigate
the background of the suspect by interrogating
the suspect, his or her parents, employers and
any other persons who may help the investigator
to discover the conduct of the suspect in daily
life and links the conduct to the offence
committed.
The investigator may also, during investigation
on the background of the suspect, seek
assistance from experts, refer to criminal record
and any other factors that may reveal the
conduct of the suspect.
Investigation findings are subject to a statement
and the investigator is required to prepare
brief and analytical document that describes the
background of the suspect which is included
the file.

Article 72: Statement
The investigator or prosecutor, while preparing
the statement, mainly focuses on the following:
1° the identity of the interrogated person;
2° the nature of the offence;
3° the time of the commission of the
offence;
4° the place of the commission of the
offence;
5° circumstances in which the offence was
committed;
6° evidence incriminating or exculpating
the suspect;
7° a statement of persons who were present
during the commission of the offence
who have any clarifications.
If it is an interrogation statement, the
investigator or prosecutor asks the interrogated
person to read the statement and verify whether
what is written corresponds to what he or she
said and signs or puts a fingerprint on it if he

she so admits it. If the interrogated person does
not know how to read, the investigator
prosecutor reads the statement to him or her.
If he or she refuses or is unable to sign or
fingerprint on the statement, it is recorded in the
statement.
Errors identified in the statement are corrected
by making an additional statement.
A statement is concluded by the following
written oath of the investigator or the
prosecutor: “I hereby swear that this statement
contains nothing but the truth”. The statement
also indicates the time it was recorded, place,
name and signature of the investigator.
An Order of the Minister in charge of justice
determines the format and content of the
statement and other documents issued by the
organ in charge of investigation or public
prosecution during investigation.
Article
73:
investigation
Confidentiality
during
Unless otherwise provided for by law,
investigation and evidence collection are
conducted in a confidential manner.

Any person involved in investigation and
evidence collection is bound by an obligation
professional secrecy.
CHAPTER IV: DETENTION AND
PROVISIONAL RELEASE BY A JUDGE
Section One: Filing a case claiming for
provisional detention
Article 74: Prosecution’s case file on
provisional detention
If the public prosecution decides to prosecute
the suspect while in provisional detention,
prepares the case file and submits it to the
competent court.
The case file to be submitted to the court
contains all the investigation records from the
organ in charge of investigation to public
prosecution as well as the public prosecution’s
conclusions providing the following:
1° the file number;
2° full particulars of the suspect;
3° the alleged offence;

4° brief description of the commission
offence;
5° serious grounds for suspecting a person
of an offence, separately justified and
linked with the relevant penal
provisions.
If the offence was committed by several people,
how the offence was committed in general, the
role of everybody in the commission of the
offence as well as serious grounds justifying the
request for provisional detention for every
suspect are indicated.
Article 75: Notification of a case file on
provisional detention to the suspect
Upon submission of the case file to the court,
the public prosecution immediately submits it
the suspect and his or her counsel, if any.
The suspect has the right to prepare the defence
submissions and submit them to the Prosecution
in a period of five (5) days from the date
which the case file was served to him or her.

Section 2: Hearing on provisional detention
Article 76: Duties of a judge during hearing
on provisional detention
A judge who hears cases on provisional
detention has the duties including the following:
1° to verify whether he or she is competent
hear cases on provisional detention
submitted to him or her;
2° to verify whether the period of detention
and other rights of the suspect have been
respected during investigation;
3° to examine whether there was
prescription or extinction of the criminal
action to the extent that would not have led
to issuance of provisional detention
warrant;
4° to examine whether there are serious
grounds to justify provisional detention
the accused;
5° to examine whether there was an agreement
of plea bargaining between the prosecutor
and the accused in order to consider

while taking a decision on provisional
detention ;
6° to consider the living conditions and the
health of the accused person;
7° to examine any other arguments contained
in the submissions by the parties.
The Judge may reclassify the offence and order
detention of the suspect if elements of the
offence can result in a mistake with regard to
characterization. However, the Judge cannot
change the offence if its elements do not match
with the classification it was assigned. In that
case, the suspect is immediately released.
Article 77: Time limits for Decision on
provisional detention and release
The court ruling on provisional detention
conducts the hearing within two (2) working
days.
The court delivers a decision within three (3)
working days of the closure of the hearing.

If the suspect is a minor aged between fourteen
(14) and eighteen (18) years, he or she must
necessarily be accompanied by a legal counsel.
Article 78: Contents of the judgment on
provisional detention and release
A court judgment on provisional detention and
release indicates the following:
1° the number of the judgement;
2° the court having heard the case, the
place and date where the case was
decided;
3° full particulars of parties;
4° how the offence was committed
general;
5° the role of everybody if the offence
committed by several people;
6° list of serious grounds and other issues
that have to be considered for everyone;
7° examination of each issue in the case
indicating the submissions of each party

and the conclusion of the court on each
issue on the basis of fact and law;
8° decision of the court;
9° whether the hearing was conducted
public or in camera and whether the
judgment was pronounced in public;
10° the place where and date when the case
was decided;
11° names of judge or judges having heard
the case;
12° names of the court registrar;
13° whether the pronouncement
postponed and reasons therefor.
was
Article 79: Duration of a provisional
detention order
The provisional detention order against
suspect is valid for thirty (30) days including the
date on which it was rendered. The order
subject to renewal for more thirty (30) days
a continuous basis. The renewal of such thirty
(30) days must be justified in relation to what
was done in the previous thirty (30) days

regard to the investigation and the objective
additional time requested.
However, for petty offences, if the period
thirty (30) days expires, it is not renewed. For
misdemeanours, the period cannot be renewed
after three (3) months the person is in detention,
and for felonies such a period cannot
renewed after six (6) months the person is
detention. If the time limits provided for under
this Paragraph expire before the case file
submitted to the court, the suspect under
provisional detention is granted provisional
release.
A court order for renewal of provisional
detention is rendered by the court under the
circumstances and time limits provided for
under Article 77 of this Law.
A court order for provisional detention
renewal of the provisional detention must
reasoned.
A court order to release or renew provisional
detention is rendered by the judge who
nearest to the place of detention of the accused
after considering whether the grounds that led
the previous judge to order detention are still
valid.

Provisional detention may also be ordered if the
accused deliberately failed to comply with
conditions imposed on him or her by the court.
Section 3: Provisional release and bail
Article 80: Instruction to respect certain
conditions
If, at any stage of criminal proceedings, there
are serious grounds for suspecting a person
an offence, the suspect may not be detained but
may be instructed to adhere to certain
requirements. Some of the requirements the
suspect may be instructed to comply with are:
1 º to reside in a territorial jurisdiction
the authority who subjected him or her
to certain conditions;
2 º prohibition from going to or going
beyond a prescribed area without prior
authorization from the authority who
subjected him or her to certain
conditions;
3 º to refrain from going to a given area
not to be in a given place at a given time;

4 º to report to a specified authority in
prescribed period of time;
5 º to report whenever required to do so;
6 º to post bail;
7 º to be monitored through technology;
8 º to surrender his/her identification papers
to a prescribed authority;
The order of the judge must indicate the
grounds on which the judge based while
approving provisional release of the suspect.
The public prosecution verifies whether the
conditions imposed by the court are observed
and if not, the prosecution requires that the
suspect be provisionally detained.
No person is ordered to report to a designated
officer for a period exceeding six (6) months for
felonies and for a period exceeding three (3)
months for misdemeanours.
For purposes of proper enforcement of the
obligations provided under Paragraph One
this Article, the court order on provisional
release may also instruct that only one condition
among the mentioned ones be respected.

The judge may at any time, upon request by the
prosecutor or the suspect granted provisional
release, modify the conditions imposed in order
to adjust them to new circumstances. The Judge
may, if necessary, due to new and serious
circumstances order that the accused be re-
detained.
Article 81: Bail
The suspect may be provisionally released
bail upon approval by:
1 º an investigator in case of a petty offence
and a misdemeanour;
2 º a Prosecutor, in case of bailable
offences in accordance with the
provisions of this Law;
3 º a Judge, in case of offences referred
under Item 2 in a trial on provisional
detention or release and at any time
before the closing of hearing at the first
instance or appeal.

The competent authority may release the
suspect on only bail or on bail with one or more
conditions referred to under article 80 of this
Law.
The bail guarantees that the suspect will appear
before the court and from which damages
arising from the offence, property to
restituted, fines and court fees are deducted,
found guilty.
Article 82: Offences subject to bail
Without prejudice to due diligence of the
competent authority to take decision, bail may
be deposited on all offences.
However, for felonies, the suspect required
deposit a bail is ordered to comply with
provisions of Article 80 of this Law.
Article 83: Types of bail and where it
deposited
Bail may be in form of cash, immovable
property or guaranteed by a third party.
The amount of money paid as bail is deposited
into the account opened and managed by the
authority that ordered bail.

The immovable property surrendered as bail
a manner mentioned in this article is considered
as a guarantee in the normal procedure
property suretyship.
If a person accepts to stand as a surety that the
accused will not evade justice with intention
be prosecuted while free, the surety must be
person of integrity and have the capacity to pay
for indemnification in case the accused fails
appear.
The surety ends with the finalization of the
normal appeal procedures. If the accused
appeared in the trial proceedings at the last
instance, he or she is responsible for all trial
costs.
If the accused did not appear in such
proceedings and he or she loses the case, the
surety may be accountable for the damages
caused by the offence as ordered in the
proceedings without the need for another
hearing to decide them.
The surety pays if the property of the accused
unable to compensate for the damages.

Article 84: Determination of bail
Bail is determined in consideration of the
damages caused by the offence, the good
conduct of the suspect attested by the local
authority of his or her residence and on whether
he or she has never been condemned by a court.
If the offence is against property, bail must
at least double the value of the property which
he or she is required to restitute.
For other offences, bail is determined at the
discretion of the competent authority
consideration of the gravity of the offence
committed and the wealth of the guarantor.
Article 85: Bail refund
If the accused is not found guilty or if the file
finally closed, the bail is refunded.
If the accused loses the case, the court decides
on the use of the bail in accordance with the
provisions of Article 81 of this Law.

Section 4: Appealing against an order
provisional detention or provisional release
Article 86: Court with which to file an appeal
The appeal against a court order rendered by
Primary Court on provisional detention
release are filed with Intermediate Court.
The appeal against an order rendered by the
Military Court are filed with Military High
Court.
An order rendered on appeal is not subject
appeal.
The appeal against an order of provisional
detention or provisional release does not
preclude the adjudication of the case on
merits.
The court with which seized of an appeal
against an order of provisional detention
provisional release examines the appeal even
the court seized of the case at first instance
hear it on merits.

Article 87: Procedure and time limits for
appealing against an order of provisional
detention or provisional release
The party not satisfied with an order
provisional detention or provisional release
may appeal against it within five (5) days
notification of the judgment.
The appeal against an order of provisional
detention or provisional release is filed in the
same way as for filing a case for provisional
detention or provisional release.
Article 88:
submission
Contents
of
the
appeal’s
Appeal is filed in form of submission filing
case. The submission indicates at least the
following:
1° full particulars of the appellant and
respondent;
2° case appealed against and the court that
heard the case;
3° the court the appeal is referred to;

4° brief description of the case;
5° a list of errors in the judgment and other
issues which must be considered;
6° details on each error or on each issue
identifying errors to be corrected and the
procedure to correct them in accordance
with the law and evidence;
7° details on additional claims if any;
8° subject matter.
Article 89: Upholding the status quo of the
suspect
During the period of appeal and before the
appellate court rules on the case, the suspect
continues to be in the same state as the court
ordered, until the court, at the appeal level,
decides otherwise.

Article 90: Prohibition of re-detention
person who has been provisionally released
A suspect in respect of whom provisional
detention or extension of provisional detention
is not granted is not subject to another arrest
warrant for the same offence, unless new and
serious grounds justifying further detention
emerge.
Article 91: Application for release
If the public prosecution finds that there is
reason to prosecute the suspect held
provisional detention, it must apply for his
her release.
The judge examining the application for release
of the suspect must render a decision within
twenty-four (24) hours after the court is seized
of the application.

TITLE III: PROSECUTION OF THE
ACCUSED BEFORE THE COURTS
CHAPTER ONE: PROSECUTION OF THE
ACCUSED AT THE FIRST INSTANCE
Section One: Filing a case before the court
Article 92: Seizing a court by public
prosecution
If the public prosecution decides to prosecute
accused, it submits a complete case file to the
competent court.
The case file submitted to the court contains the
following:
1° the public prosecution’s
submitting the claim;
2° indictment;
3° the list of documents that make up the
case file;
4° a statement notifying the civil parties,
any, that the claim was lodged to the
court;
statement

5° the list of attached documents on the
annex.
The public prosecution may withdraw the case
if it considers unnecessary to prosecute the
accused.
Article 93: Indictment
A prosecutor is required to consider the
following while preparing an indictment:
1 º particulars and domicile of the
defendants, their e-mails and telephone
numbers if they have them or the
address of any other person whose
name is given by the defendants who
may inform them;
2 º conduct and a brief description
background of the defendant;
3 º details on the qualification of the
offence, applicable law and place
commission of the offence;
4 º matters related
competence;
jurisdictional
5 º brief description of the commission
the offence;
to

6 º a list of offences under prosecution;
7 º details on the role of each party under
prosecution;
8 º acts that constitute the offence and
respective proof;
9 º penalties as proposed by the
prosecution, applicable legal provisions
and justifications;
10 º a list of attachments in consideration
contents of the case file;
11 º a list of seized properties and their
evidence;
12 º reports prepared by experts, if any;
The following are also required to be included
on the attachments:
1° a statement on interrogation of the
victim of the offence on whether he/ she
intends to apply for civil damages;

2° a statement indicating the property that
was seized under custody and the place
of custody;
3° a plea bargaining agreement, if any.
With exception of where it is impossible,
claim must be lodged by use of technology.
Article 94: Reception of defence submissions
Defence submissions are prepared within thirty
(30) days from the day the defendant is notified
of the claim lodging.
The defence submissions are submitted to the
competent court registrar who verifies the
requirements referred to in Article 93 of this
Law. The verification is conducted immediately
and the response is issued immediately where
applicable. In any case, the court registry cannot
exceed three (3) days without notifying the
defendant of reception of his or her
submissions.
When the court registrar receives submissions
sent by use of technology and finds them
complete, he or she acknowledges receipt
thereof and informs all parties.

When submissions are submitted by means
other than the use of technology and the
registrar finds them complete, he or she signs,
stamps and dates them in acknowledgment
receipt and gives a copy to all parties while the
original is kept in the file.
In case the court registrar finds that the
submissions do not comply with the
requirements, he or she receives them and
notifies the defendant in writing of the missing
documents. When the defendant brings such
documents, the court registrar replaces the
previous file. The notification is retained in the
file.
In case of discovery of any other proof after the
parties exchange submissions and before
proceedings commence, they are required
exchange the submissions through procedures
above.
Article 95: Court’s initiative to take up a case
An individual may bring a case before the court
by way of private prosecution in the
circumstances under this Law.

The court may on its own initiative take up
case if an offence of contempt of court
committed.
The court may take up a case when receiving
case file transferred by another court.
Section 2: Status of the accused and
application for provisional release when the
court is seized to hear the case on its merits
Article 96: Status of the accused when the
court is seized to hear the case on its merits
When the court is seized to hear the case on
merits while the accused is detained, the
accused remains in detention until the judgment
is pronounced or the court decides otherwise.
he or she was not in detention or was
provisionally released before the court is seized
to hear the case on its merits, he or she is tried
while free.
However, when the court is seized to hear the
case on its merits, the period of provisional
detention cannot exceed the maximum period
imprisonment provided by Law for the offence
alleged against the accused. Once such

deadline expires without the accused being
tried, he or she is released and tried while free.
The suspect held in provisional detention may
petition the court seized of the initial claim
against him or her to overturn the order
provisional detention or to order his or her
provisional release.
The court rules on the application for
provisional release before hearing the case
its merits.
The suspect held in provisional detention
following a court order is not released unless his
or her release is ordered by the court. The court
renders a decision in accordance with the
provisions of Article 77 of this Law.
If the court orders provisional release, the
provisions of Articles 80 and 81 of this Law
apply.
Article 97: Application for provisional
release
For any offence, a suspect or his or her legal
counsel may apply to the court for provisional
release depending on the stage of the
proceedings.

The judge decides on such an application within
five (5) days. If an objection is raised as to the
provisional release, the judge hearing the case
on the merits must first decide on the objection.
If release is ordered, some conditions may
imposed on the accused.
Article 98: Summons to appear before court
In case the case file is due to be heard, parties
are immediately summoned to appear in courts
for proceedings.
Summoning is done through technology and
must at least indicate the names of the plaintiff,
domicile or residence, charges, court before
which he or she has to appear, venue, day and
time to appear. It also indicates if the plaintiff
must appear before court in person
represented.
In case the use of technology is impossible, the
summons is posted at the known domicile of the
defendant in Rwanda and it is personally given
to the defendant or served at his or her
residence.

In case the defendant does not have any known
domicile in Rwanda but with a known
residence, the summons is served at his or her
residence.
The summons is served by a court bailiff or
court registrar. The copy of the summons
given to the Prosecutor, the accused, the person
liable to pay damages or any other summoned
person.
In case of unavailability of the summoned
person, the summons is served to his or her
spouse, employer, next of kin, employee who
live in his or her domicile or residence and are
at least sixteen (16) years of age.
In case none is available among those
mentioned, the summons is given to the
executive secretary of the cell of domicile
residence of the defendant.
The summons may also be served by sending
its copy in a sealed envelope in a registered
mail or carried by a messenger who is required
to indicate acknowledgment of receipt which
bears the date and the signature
of
the
summoned person or of one of the persons
mentioned in the preceding Paragraph.

Article 99: Modalities of summons by public
notice
Summons by public notice is made by posting
copy of the summons in a visible place on the
court premises determined by the court seized
of the case in addition to posting the extract
such summons at the seats of all Intermediate
Courts and making it public using any other
channel the court may deem appropriate within
a period of two (2) months.
Service of summons provided for under
Paragraph One of this Article is accompanied
by the publication of the order of the President
of the Court compelling the accused to appear
within the prescribed time limits and informing
him or her that he or she is expected to collect
copy of the complaint from the court registry.
The order is published in one state-owned
newspaper and if necessary, in another
independent newspaper with wide circulation
determined by the President of the Court.
The President of the Court may order that the
summons be published using any other
appropriate means such as radio, television
any other electronic channel.

The order is published in Kinyarwanda.
However, if necessary, its publication may be
another official language if necessary.
Article 100: Proof of summons by public
notice
Summons by public notice is evidenced by the
deposit into the court registry of a copy of the
page of the newspaper in which the summons
was published.
Article 101: Summons addressed
organisations and legal entities
The summons addressed to organizations and
legal entities are served through electronic
means. In case of impossibility to serve the
summons electronically, the summons is served
at their registered office or at any of their branch
office.
The summons is given to the person responsible
for receiving mails.
If the registered office of such organizations and
legal entities is unknown, the summons
served in the manner provided for under Article
99 of this Law.

Article 102: Summoning a person with
known or unknown residence or domicile
abroad
If the summoned person has no residence
domicile in Rwanda but has a known residence
abroad, a copy of the summons is posted on
notice board in the premises of the court which
must hear the case and at any other place
determined by the court, with another copy
immediately sent to the summoned person
through technology, the post office or through
the Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs who
then issues an acknowledgement of receipt.
If the summoned person has unknown residence
or domicile in Rwanda or abroad, a copy of the
summons is posted on a notice board in the
premises of the court which must hear the case
and in any other place determined by the court,
with extracts being made public using any other
channel the court considers appropriate.
Article 103: Time limits for the appearance
of the accused or the person liable for
damages
Time limits for the appearance of the accused
the person liable for damages is eight (8) days,

but excluding the date of receipt of the
summons and that of appearance.
Time limits for the appearance of persons who
have no known residence or domicile
Rwanda or abroad is two (2) months.
If the summons is served on a person in his
her country of residence while he or she neither
domiciles nor resides in Rwanda, the time limit
for appearance is one (1) month. The court may
extend such time limit if deemed necessary.
Article 104: Reduction of the period
appear
The President of the Court may, by use of
order explaining reasons and which must
notified to the accused during summoning or
the person required to pay damages,
necessary, reduce the period of eight (8) days
specified in paragraph one of Article 103 of this
Law, if the accused committed a petty offence,
caught red-handed, pleads guilty or if he or she
immediately appeared and any other reasons the
court may consider necessary.

Article 105: Time limits for appearance
case of a summons by mail, by a messenger
or by posting in an appropriate place
If the summons is sent through the post office
or a messenger, the time limits for appearance
start from the date the post or messenger
delivers it to the summoned person.
If the summons is posted on a notice board
the court premises and at such other place
may be determined by the court, the time limits
for appearance start from the date of the posting
on the court premises.
Article 106: Summoning co-offenders
accomplices that were not brought before the
court
If the court believes that there are reasonable
grounds to suspect co-offenders or accomplices
in commission of an offence, the court
summons them to provide any required details
in the proceedings.
If the person summoned does not appear, the
court orders the public prosecution to compel
that person to appear.

If the court examines the person summoned
the proceedings in the procedure provided for
under Paragraphs One and 2 of this Article and
discovers that the evidence is insufficient
convict the person, the court decides to proceed
with the hearing without re-summoning them
proceedings.
If the court believes that the details submitted
are insufficient and that there is incriminating
evidence, the court instructs the public
prosecution to conduct investigations on the
basis of findings in the court proceedings
order to take him or her to court. The public
prosecution is also required to comply with the
decision of the court.
Section 3: Production of evidence
Article 107: Burden of proof
The burden of proof is on the public prosecution
or, in case of a claim for damages or private
prosecution, on the victim of an offence or his
or her rightful beneficiaries.
An accused is always presumed innocent until
proven guilty by a final court decision. An
accused is not obliged to prove his or her

innocence unless his or her guilt has been
established.
However, where evidence to support the
offence is presented, the accused or his or her
legal counsel may present all the defences
available to him or her, raise a plea
inadmissibility or show that the allegations
against him or her do not constitute an offence
or he or she is innocent and present all the facts
challenging the veracity of incriminating
evidence.
Unless provided otherwise by Law, the
production of evidence is made in accordance
with the Law relating to the production
evidence.
Article 108: Basis for the production
evidence
Evidence is based on all the facts and legal
considerations provided that parties are given
an opportunity to present adversary arguments.
The court decides at its discretion on the
veracity and admissibility of incriminating
exculpatory evidence.

Article 109: Collection of evidence
Upon request by the Prosecution or parties or
its own initiative, the court may order the
production of any evidence which it deems
conclusive.
At the hearing, the court may itself collect
evidence which has not been collected by the
Prosecution, the plaintiff, the accused or their
legal counsels.
Article 110 Receiving and examining
evidence produced by the parties
The judge must in all cases receive and examine
all incriminating or exculpatory evidence
produced by the parties to support their
arguments.
Article 111: Benefit of doubt to the accused
The benefit of doubt is given to the accused.
If the proceedings conducted as completely
possible do not enable judges to find reliable
evidence proving beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused committed the offence, the judges
order his or her acquittal.

Section 4: Civil action arising from an
offence
Article 112: Competent court to try a civil
action
A person aggrieved by an offence who intends
to apply for damages may either file an action
in a criminal court or a civil court.
However, once the aggrieved person chooses
file his or her action in one court, either criminal
or civil, he or she cannot later file the same
action in another court.
Article 113: Trying a civil action
When a civil action is instituted before
criminal court, the court hears such action
accordance with Laws governing civil
procedure for cases heard on the merits.

Article 114: Separating a civil action from
criminal action
In case a civil action is filed before a criminal
court, the court may, at its own initiative,
upon request by one of the parties, separate
civil action from the criminal case in case the
civil action may prejudice or delay the trial
the criminal action.
The decision to separate the civil action from
the criminal action is an administrative decision
which may be taken by a court registrar or
judge on own initiative or on request of one
the parties. The decision, upon application
the President of the Court, may be reversed
within forty-eight (48) hours in case it is taken
by the registrar. In that case, the proceedings
continue after the decision is taken.
A decision to separate cases taken by a judge
during the hearing is not subject to appeal.
However, separation of a civil action from
criminal action at first instance at appeal level
is inadmissible.

Article 115: Suspension of proceedings
civil action
Proceedings in civil action is suspended until
the criminal case is finally adjudicated, if the
criminal action was instituted before or in the
course of civil proceedings in accordance with
the provisions of the Law determining
jurisdiction of courts.
Article 116: Time to file a civil action
A victim of an offence may file a civil action
a competent court in order to be indemnified,
from the time when the court is seized with the
criminal action to the time when the
proceedings are closed at first instance. The
court informs the concerned parties thereof.
Article 117: Withdrawal of a civil action
within criminal proceedings
A person aggrieved by an offence who files
civil action within criminal proceedings may
withdraw the action at any time until the closing
of the proceedings. He or she may do so
giving notice before the hearing or in the course
of the hearing.

Article 118: Private prosecution
A victim of an offence may initiate criminal
proceedings by way of private prosecution.
Private prosecution is carried out when the
victim of an offence files a claim in a criminal
court demanding that the offender, his or her co-
offender or accomplice be punished and
ordered to pay damages proportional to the
injury caused.
Article 119: Identification of acts the accused
is alleged to have committed
A person who files an action by way of private
prosecution must clearly indicate acts the
defendant is accused to have committed
enable him or her to properly prepare his or her
case expeditiously.
Aggravating circumstances, if any, must also
indicated in the complaint to enable the accused
to present his or her defence accordingly.

Article 120: Filing a claim by way of private
prosecution
Filing a claim by way of private prosecution
takes place when a criminal case file is finally
closed without further action or when a period
of three (3) months for petty offences and six
(6) months for misdemeanours and felonies
elapse after the public prosecution receives the
file but without taking any action.
The time limits provided for under Paragraph
One of this Article are counted from the time
the case is referred to the prosecution or from
the time a criminal case file is forwarded to the
public prosecution from the organ in charge
investigation. The court seized notifies the
public prosecution with an obligation to get
involved in the case.
Article 121: Discontinuance of a claim
submitted by way of private prosecution
A victim of an offence who filed a case in
court by way of private prosecution may at any
time, discontinue a claim from the time of filing
the case to the time of closure of the
proceedings by doing it in the court proceedings
or in the registry of the court seized.
discontinuance of a claim is done in the court

registry, the court registrar has the obligation
notify the concerned parties.
However, withdrawing the civil action when the
victim of the offence filed the case with the
court by way of private prosecution does not
prevent continuation of the criminal action.
Article 122: Civil action arising from an
offence
A victim of an offence without filing a civil
action and a criminal action in the same court
may directly seize a civil court to claim for
compensation for the damages caused by the
acts committed against him or her.
If a civil action is heard separately but when
arises from a criminal action, the hearing of the
civil action is conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the Law determining the
jurisdiction of courts.

Section 5: Appearance of parties
Article 123: Appearance in person of the
accused person
A person accused to have committed a felony
required to appear in court in person.
However, in case of a misdemeanour, the
accused can appear through his or her legal
counsel if he or she gives serious reasons
preventing his or her personal appearance.
In case of a petty offence, the accused can
represented by a legal counsel unless the judge
orders that the accused appear in person.
Article 124: Appearance of a person liable
for damages and claimant for damages
The offender and the civil party appear before
court in person or represented.
However, a court can, at any time, order a party
to appear in person.

An order that requires a party to appear
person and the date of appearance are notified
in accordance with provisions on summons.
Section 6: Pre-trial session
Article 125: Preliminary hearing
The panel can, if it considers it necessary, and
after consultations with the President of the
Court, confirm that the preliminary hearing
precedes the trial of the case and determine the
date of hearing.
Preliminary hearing is conducted in camera.
The court sets the agenda of the preliminary
hearing. The court does this after consultations
with the concerned parties.
During preliminary hearing, the court can
examine issues related to admission of the case
and other incidental proceedings that can hinder
or delay the trial on the merits.
Matters that are examined in the preliminary
hearing include:
1º
matters related to jurisdiction, interests
and capacity;

2º
matters on security of witnesses;
3º
matters on separation or merger
cases;
4º
matters based
representation;
5º
the number of witnesses, their role, their
location and the means of application
their communication;
6º
confirming the witnesses that require
protection and to put in place security
strategies for the authorized parties;
7º
confirmation of the number and identity
of witnesses expected to be summoned
by the public prosecution and those
be summoned by the defendant;
8º
to agree on arguments of the case, their
supporting evidence and the legal
provisions of both parties on each
argument;
9º
to agree on the schedules of the
proceedings
depending
on
the
arguments of the case;
on
the
right

10º to agree on the time each party will
utilize in explaining every item and
hear its witnesses;
11º to inquire from both parties the time
when hearing the case in merits would
commence and end;
12º admission of testimony from the person
who will not be present during the
hearing and such testimony can also
recorded through audio-visual format;
13º to take any other necessary decisions
that are helpful in the smooth conduct
the hearing.
Section 7: Conduct of the hearing
Article 126: Guiding principles of criminal
cases
Criminal cases must adhere to the following
substantial principles:
1° being held in public;

2° being fair and impartial;
3° respect for the right to defence and
legal counsel;
4° adversarial proceedings and equality
parties before the law;
5° basing on evidence lawfully produced
and being rendered within the time
limits prescribed by Law in the language
used in the pleading.
The prosecution procedure is carried out and
completed in accordance with law.
Article 127: Procedure for conducting the
hearing
The hearing is conducted in the following order:
1°
the president of the bench announces the
commencement of the hearing;
2°
the court registrar calls upon the parties
and reads out the initial charges;

3°
the judge examines whether the
identities of the parties are complete and
agrees with the parties on their
particulars;
4°
the judge examines the identities of the
witnesses, if present, and asks the
parties if there are witnesses that are not
accepted and confirms those who will
heard, puts them in private and separates
them;
5°
the judge together with the parties
examines any incidentals that may have
not been cleared in the preliminary
hearing and takes a decision thereon. No
any other incidentals are admitted
unless those based on public order
which can be admitted at any time;
6°
in case there is no incidental, the judge
describes briefly what constitutes
submissions from parties and announces
the main points of the case and the order
in which they will be examined
accordance with what was agreed in the
preliminary hearing;
7°
the judge asks the prosecutor to indicate
the facts of the case and evidence
each point in accordance with the order

of the hearing, and if necessary, he calls
upon the witnesses to testify;
8°
on the other side, the judge asks the
defendant and defence counsels
present their defence and where
necessary, the defence witnesses are
given the opportunity as well;
9°
the judge himself or herself examines
each party;
10° parties or counsels can cross-examine
witnesses of the other party. Where
necessary, the prosecution or the
defendant can re-examine the witnesses
invited in the court;
11° the judge can, at any time, during
presentation
of
evidence
and
examination of witnesses ask questions
that can assist him or her to understand
the submissions of parties and
examine whether the evidence and their
legal basis as presented by parties
regard to each point in the case are
understood in a clear and similar
manner, whether on the side of the judge
as well as on the side of the parties;

12° in case there are witnesses, they are
examined on individual basis after
taking oath. If necessary, they are given
an opportunity to cross-examine each
other in front of the parties or in absence
of parties, if their presence can prejudice
truth;
13° parties are given an opportunity
respond on the testimony, and where
necessary, to cross-examine each other
or between them and witnesses;
14° the judge, after hearing each party on
points of the case, declares the hearing
closed and informs parties the date and
time of pronouncement of the judgment;
15° parties sign on the hearing minutes;
A judge, at all times, refrain from engaging
questions that can demonstrate partiality
questions that can indicate the direction of the
case before the final judgment.
The presiding judge is responsible
conducting and closing the hearing.
for

Article 128: Trial in absentia or in the
absence of the public prosecution
If a person duly summoned fails to appear
without valid reasons, he or she is tried
absentia.
If the public prosecution does not appear for the
first time, the case is adjourned. If the public
prosecution does not appear for the second time
with no reason and when the defendant is
provisional detention, the court orders
provisional release of the defendant and the case
is heard in absentia of the public prosecution
unless the defendant is accused of a felony.
case the public prosecution fails to appear for
three (3) consecutive times in regard to a felony,
the hearing continues while the defendant is free
even in the absence of the public prosecution.
Article 129: Amicus curiae
A person or an organ can be authorized
provide submissions as amicus curiae if they
have expertize that can assist the court in taking
a decision on the case.

Application for being amicus curiae is done
writing and addressed to the president of the
competent court.
The application must indicate a detailed identity
and the document indicating impartiality of the
applicant, a document of expertise in the field,
a brief description of issues in respect of which
the applicant deems it necessary to provide
assistance and justify the usefulness of his
her assistance in the effective delivery
justice;
The application of the amicus curiae is rejected
if the amicus curiae does not provide any
assistance in the case or if there is a reasonable
ground to indicate partiality.
The court can, for purposes of smooth running
of the case, invite a person or an organ
amicus curiae to provide any information,
expertise or any other thing the court can
consider necessary.
Article 130: Time and place for the conduct
of hearing
The hearing takes place at the seat of the court
on the date set by the court. If necessary, the
hearing can take place in such other place as can
be determined by the court.

The court can also conduct hearings and hear
witnesses through electronic means.
Article 131: Order of the court to conduct
hearing in camera
Hearing is conducted in public. However, the
court can decide to conduct the hearing
camera if the hearing can endanger public order
or public morals and at any time the judge
believes it is necessary.
In case hearing in camera is decided,
pronouncement of decisions on objections and
incidental proceedings can also be conducted
camera.
The judgment on merits is always pronounced
in public.
Article 132: Records by the court registrar
The court registrar takes note of the
proceedings, particulars of parties and
witnesses as well as their key submissions and
they affix their signature thereto.

Other electronic means can be used to record
court proceedings, if possible.
Article 133: Conduct required of a person
speaking at the hearing
In his or her acts and words, any person
speaking at the hearing must be respectful
towards judges, adversarial parties and all other
people present.
A party who takes floor at the hearing speaks
freely about matters relating to the case but with
all due respect to justice and clarity to enable
judges to easily understand his or her
contentions.
A party who diverts and speaks issues irrelevant
to the subject matter or who demonstrates
minimal politeness is called to order by the
presiding judge. If the party persists or uses
disrespectful language, the presiding judge
silences the party for a moment in a polite way
without assaulting or upsetting him or her. If the
party refuses to comply, he or she is punished
accordance with the law.
Any order of the judge meant to maintain order
for the smooth running of the hearing
immediately executed as such.

Article 134: Dress code that conforms to the
honour of the court
Any dress code that undermines the court
honour during court proceedings is prohibited.
Instructions of the President of the Supreme
Court identifies prohibited dress code in the
court hearing.
Article 135: Order during the hearing
In a court or in any other place where a public
court hearing is held, if one or more persons
present make noise, express approval
disapproval by causing or stirring up trouble
any way, the presiding judge calls them to order
and expel them if they persist and, if necessary,
seek intervention of law enforcement forces
without prejudice to other penalties provided
law.
If the person who causes trouble is a party to the
proceedings, the presiding judge call him or her
to order and warn him or her that if he or she
persists, he or she will expel him or her and
continue the hearing as if he or she is present.
he or she is expelled and refuses to leave the
courtroom, the presiding judge seeks

intervention of law enforcement forces to expel
the party by force without prejudice to other
penalties provided by the law.
If the trouble is caused by a court employee, the
provisions of Paragraph One of this Article
apply.
Article 136: Audio and visual recording
court hearing
Except persons authorized by the President
the court, any other person who intends to take
audio or visual records in the court does
before the panel of judges enters the court room
or after the closure of hearing and after the panel
of judges exits the court room.
However, any person who intends to write
anything relating to the hearing is authorized
do so.
Authorisation to take audio or visual records
court hearing is applied for in writing at least
forty eight (48) hours before the hearing.
The President of the court takes a decision
accept or reject the application to take audio
visual records before the hearing after
examining whether there are no consequences

on justice, national security, security of the
parties and public morals. The decision
notified to the applicant who requested
authorisation to take audio or visual records
before the beginning of hearing.
Article 137: Trial of offences of contempt
court
If a person commits an offence of contempt
court punishable with a maximum
imprisonment of five (5) years, the court can
immediately sentence him or her.
If a person commits an offence of contempt
court punishable with imprisonment of more
than five (5) years, the court, after ordering for
his or her arrest and drawing up a statement
facts, produces him or her before a Prosecutor
and submits incriminating evidence for
prosecution.
Section 8: Pronouncement of the judgement
Article 138: Time for pronouncement
judgment
Every judgment must be in writing and
pronounced in a period not exceeding thirty (30)
days from the day of closure of the hearing.

case of failure, a judge or judges who heard the
case are subject to disciplinary measures.
Reasons that led to failure of pronouncement
judgment within thirty (30) days are indicated
in case judgment.
In case one of the parties or his or her counsel
was not informed of the day of pronouncement
of the judgment, he or she is informed by the
court registrar or court bailiff of how the case
was decided in accordance with the usual
regulations governing notification of court
documents.
Article 139: Contents of the judgment
A court judgment must indicate the following:
1° the number of the case;
2° the court that heard the case, place and
date on which the judgment was
pronounced;
3° complete identity of parties;
4° subject matter;
5° nature of the case;

6° list of issues that constitute the case;
7° examination of each issue in the case
indicating the submissions of each party
and the decision of the court on each issue
on the basis of fact and law;
8° decision of the court whether the accused
is innocent or guilty;
9° the offence of which the party is convicted
if he or she was not innocent;
10° awarded penalties;
11° damages that must be paid, if any;
12° decision taken on the seized property;
13° whether parties were present or not;
14° whether the hearing was conducted
public or in camera and whether the
judgment was pronounced in public;
15° the date and place where the case was
decided;

16° the name or names of the judges who heard
the case;
17° whether it is decided and pronounced
public;
18° whether pronouncement was postponed
and reasons thereof;
19° any dissenting opinion and reasons thereof
in brief;
20° names of judge or judges who heard the
case;
21° names of the court registrar.
If the case was decided by more than one judge,
any judge or judges who disagree with the
decision taken by colleagues can attach their
dissenting opinion and the reasons to the
judgment and that opinion is written below
signatures of the members of bench. The
dissenting opinion is not read in public.
The case is signed by the judge or judges who
heard the case and the court registrar who was
present during pronouncement.

Article 140: Fate of bail in case of acquittal
or conviction of the accused
If the accused had been granted bail and
acquitted, the court orders that such bail
refunded to him or her after possible deduction
of additional court fees incurred as a result
his or her absence in a court proceedings.
If the accused is convicted, the bail in whole
in part is paid out for redress for the damages
caused by the offence, restitutions, fines and
court fees.
Article 141: Obligation of indicating the
competent court
If a court rules that it does not have jurisdiction
to hear the case, it must immediately inform the
accused of the court competent to hear the case
and forward the case file to that court.

Article 142: Notification of a judgment
pronounced in absentia
The defendant is notified of the judgment
pronounced in absentia in procedures similar
procedures of serving summons.
CHAPTER II: SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS
Section One: Procedure for trying a case on
unlawful detention
Article 143: Unlawful detention
Any detention in violation of provisions
Articles 66, 74 and 79 of this Law is unlawful
and punishable.
Unlawful detention provided under Paragraph
One of this Article includes:
1° detaining a person in an irrelevant facility;
2° detaining a person for a period longer than
the period specified in the arrest statement
and in the provisional detention warrants;

3° continued detention of a person after
decision rejecting provisional detention
its extension or granting provisional release
was taken;
4° continued detention of a person after
decision of acquittal was taken;
5° continued detention of a person who was
punished by a fine;
6° detaining a person whose sentence was
suspended;
7° continued detention of a person who served
his or her sentence;
8° being detained by an unauthorized person;
9° detention that does not comply with
formalities of arrest and provisional
detention.
Article 144: Procedure for instituting a claim
against unlawful detention
Any person who files a case claiming of his
her illegal detention or that of a third party does
so in the court competent to hear such a case
which is near the place of detention,
accordance with the normal way of filing
direct case.

The claim is heard within forty eight (48) hours
from the time the claim was instituted and the
decision is taken within five (5) days. The claim
is not subject to legal fees.
The President of the Court, after the claim
registered, assigns a panel of judges to hear the
case and the plaintiff is summoned to present
details the justifications of what is contained
submissions submitted to the Court.
The judge who hears the case mentioned
Paragraph 2 of this Article, after understanding
the submissions of the plaintiff and the legal
provisions relating to the case, can or cannot
summon the defendant.
When the decision to summon the defendant
taken, the defendant appears as an individual
through his or her legal counsel together with
the person he or she is accused to have been
unlawfully detained.
The decision referred to in Paragraph 4 of this
Article provides justifications for summoning
the defendant, errors of law and date of hearing
and orders the defendant to submit to the court

defence submissions in a period not exceeding
twenty four (24) hours before the hearing.
The person who took an illegal decision or who
failed to take the required order is heard
accordance with law.
The public prosecution must be summoned
such cases.
Article 145: Decision on claim against
unlawful detention
The court can, after considering the
justifications provided, order for the retaining
or release of the detainee. The court can also
order for provisional release of the detainee and
instruct him or her to comply with requirements
specified in Article 80 of this Law.
Where the court convicts the person who
accused of unlawful detention, it sentences him
or her to the penalties provided for by the Law.
The court order can be subject to appeal within
the time limits provided by the procedure
provisional detention and release.

Section 2: Prosecution of a juvenile offender
Article 146: Determination of minority of
juvenile offender
The time of commission of an offence serves
the basis for the determination of the minority
of a juvenile offender.
A juvenile offender prosecuted by the public
prosecution is tried by the specialised chamber
for minors even if the trial is conducted after
or she attains the majority age.
Article 147: Prosecuting a juvenile offender
An investigator or a prosecutor in charge of the
case file does everything possible and conducts
the necessary investigations to establish the
truth about the personality of the juvenile
offender and identify appropriate means for his
or her rehabilitation.
The investigator or the prosecutor, through
investigations, gathers all evidence concerning
all the aspects of the minor’s life including
character and history, educational background,
school behaviour and conditions relating
upbringing of the child.

A prosecutor can order a medical examination
and, where applicable, require a psychological
examination for the minor. The prosecutor
decides to put the minor in a conducive
atmosphere to enable the minor be rehabilitated
for social reintegration.
Where necessary, the prosecutor can issue
necessary warrants or order judicial supervision
in compliance with rules of general law.
Article 148: Trial of a minor and his or her
co-accused
A minor aged above fourteen (14) years but
below eighteen (18) years is tried in accordance
with rules of general law.
A specialized chamber for minors adjudicates
the case after hearing the minor, witnesses, his
or her parents, guardian or custodian, the public
prosecution and his or her legal counsel. It also
tries his or her co-accused or accomplices
having reached the age of majority, unless the
law provides otherwise.

Article 149: Detention of a minor under
prosecution
A minor aged below fourteen (14) years is not
prosecuted.
A juvenile offender aged fourteen (14) years
subject to prosecution but cannot be detained
the same detention facility as major suspects.
Article 150: Decision that can be taken
against a juvenile offender
After compliance with the procedure provided
for under Article 147 of this Law, the prosecutor
can:
1° release the minor if he or she considers
that there is no sufficient incriminating
evidence against the child and return
him or her to the parents, guardians
custodians;
2° take the juvenile
competent court;
offender
to

3° put the minor in a public centre intended
for that purpose pending a court
decision.
Article 151: Right to legal counsel
A juvenile offender under prosecution must
have a legal counsel from investigations stage
to court proceedings. If the juvenile offender
his or her guardians are unable to access a legal
counsel, the organ in charge of investigations
the public prosecution requests the President
the Bar Association to assign a legal counsel
the juvenile.
If the public prosecution does not seek legal
representation for the juvenile, the judge
requests the President of the Bar Association
assign a legal counsel to the juvenile.
Article 152: Measure taken by the specialised
chamber for minors
A specialised chamber for minors, depending
on the case filed, takes measures for the
protection, assistance, supervision and
education of the minor it considers appropriate.

Article 153: Civil action against a minor
A civil action against a minor and the person
with civil responsibility over the minor is filed
in the specialised chamber for minors.
If one or several minors are jointly charged with
one or several adults, a claim for damages
filed in the court competent to try adults. In that
case, the minor does not appear in court
person and rather appears through his or her
legally recognized representative.
If a minor fails to choose for himself or herself
a representative or if the guardian is unable
do so, the juvenile is assigned a legal counsel.
Section 3: Prosecution of an offence
committed outside the territory of the
Republic of Rwanda
Article 154: Prosecution of a Rwandan who
commits an offence outside the territory
the Republic of Rwanda
A Rwandan national who commits a felony or
misdemeanour outside the territory of the
Republic of Rwanda, can be prosecuted and
tried by Rwandan courts in accordance with the
Rwandan laws as if the offence was committed

on the Rwandan territory if such an offence
punishable under Rwandan law.
Article 155: Prosecution of a felony or
misdemeanour committed abroad
The prosecution of a felony or misdemeanour
committed abroad can only be instituted at the
request of the public prosecution or any other
interested persons.
Prosecution cannot be instituted if the accused
proves that he or she was subject to a final
judgment delivered abroad and that in the event
of conviction he or she served his or her
sentence or was granted a pardon.
Article 156: Prosecuting
committed in no man’s land
an
offence
An offence is considered to have been
committed on the territory of the Republic
Rwanda if it is committed by or against
Rwandan national in no man’s land
committed by any person on board a vessel
flying the Rwanda flag and in waters in a
man’s land or on board a Rwanda -registered
aircraft in a no man’s land.

Article 157: International or transnational
crimes
Rwandan courts can prosecute and try any
person, whether Rwandan or foreigner,
Rwandan or foreign non-governmental
organisation or legal entity that commits, inside
or outside the territory of the Republic
Rwanda, an international crime or
transnational crime as provided for by the Law
determining offences and penalties in general.
Article 158: Proceedings for international
transnational crimes
In case Rwandan courts try crimes provided for
under Article 157 of this Law, the President
the Supreme Court can, in the interest of justice
and for the sake of conforming proceedings
the international jurisprudence, seek upon own
initiative or request by the accused, his or her
legal counsel or by national or foreign public
prosecution, judicial cooperation from the
United Nations, any other international

organisation or a foreign country by requesting
them to send judges from other countries
Rwanda to sit alongside Rwandan judges to try
cases of international and transnational crimes
committed on the Rwandan territory or abroad,
of which the transfer to Rwanda is sought and
which are provided under the Law determining
the jurisdiction of courts.
Such cases are tried both at first instance and
appeal level by a bench of at least three (3)
judges.
The request for a judge from a foreign country
is made in accordance with cooperation
procedure between countries and international
organisations.
Article 159: Prosecution of an offence
committed against Rwanda or against
Rwandan national outside the territory
the Republic of Rwanda
A Rwandan national or a foreigner who
commits a felony or a misdemeanour outside
the territory of the Republic of Rwanda can
prosecuted and sentenced by Rwandan courts
accordance with the Rwandan laws if the
offence is committed against Rwanda or

Rwandan national at the time of the commission
of the offence.
Section 4: Prosecution and trial of a fugitive
suspect
Article 160: Fugitive suspect
If the suspect, whether he or she is in Rwanda
or in a foreign country, is not arrested because
he or she hides or escapes justice, the public
prosecution prepares a file for him or her and
submits it to the competent court even if the
suspect was not interrogated. After receiving
the file, the court orders the accused to appear
within one (1) month, failing which the court
declares that he or she has disobeyed the law.
Article 161: Publication of the order
The order provided for under Article 160 of this
Law is, within a period of eight (8) days, posted
in the appropriate place at the court which
issued it and it is published in the newspaper
determined by the court.

Article 162: Trial of a fugitive suspect
If the fugitive suspect fails to respect the time
limits provided for under Article 160 of this
Law, he or she is tried in absentia.
The court rules on the case based solely on the
submissions of the public prosecution.
Article 163: Non representation of a fugitive
suspect
No person can legally represent a fugitive
suspect in the court.
Article 164: Confiscation or seizure of the
property of a convicted fugitive
If the accused fugitive is found guilty, the court
determines modalities for the management
his/her property. The property can
confiscated or seized and sold by auction
accordance with relevant laws, with the
proceeds being used to pay for damages to the
victims of the offence.

Article 165: Publication of the extract of the
judgement
The extract of the judgment is posted on the
websites of the Judiciary, the Rwanda Public
Prosecution Authority and the Rwanda
Investigation Bureau and are posted at the
notice board of the court that tried the case.
Article 166: Loss of civil rights
After the publication provided for under Article
165 of this Law is completed, a convicted
fugitive is stripped of all civil rights as provided
for under the law determining offences and
penalties in general.
Article 167: Prosecution of the co-accused
an accused fugitive
The prosecution of the accused fugitive does not
in any way whatsoever stay or delay the
prosecution of his or her co-accused who are
identified.

Article 168: Resumption of prosecution of
fugitive
If a convicted fugitive surrenders himself
herself to the judicial police, the Public
Prosecution or before the prison administration
or if he or she is arrested before the penalty
prescribes, the judgement and proceedings
conducted from the time the fugitive was
ordered to appear until the pronouncement
the judgment become void and the prosecution
of the fugitive re-commences in accordance
with the ordinary procedure.
If the judgment that had ordered confiscation
his or her property for the benefit of the State
seizure of such property is altered, the property
is given back to him or her.
If the property of the convicted person is sold
by auction and the person is subsequently
acquitted in retrial, the State pays him or her
damages equal to the value of his or her
property.
If a person is acquitted in retrial of the case
which he or she was convicted, civil parties
refund damages received.

Article 169: Retrial of a fugitive
In the case provided for under Paragraph One
Article 168 of this Law, if for any reason
witnesses fail to attend the new proceedings that
are restarted, their written testimonies and
written replies of other persons accused of the
same offence who were not present during the
hearing are read out in the hearing. The same
applies to all other necessary documents
required to establish the truth.
Section 5: Prosecution of persons with
privilege of jurisdiction and that of Members
of Parliament
Sub-Section One: Prosecution of persons
with privilege of jurisdiction
Article 170: Persons with privilege
jurisdiction
An investigator or a prosecutor who receives
complaint against or personally observes
offence committed by the President of the
Republic, the President of the Senate, the
Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies, the
President of the Supreme Court or the Prime
Minister, immediately transmits the case file

the Prosecutor General who conducts
investigation. The Prosecutor General in person
prosecutes them before the Supreme Court and
in case of his or her absence, he or she
replaced by the Deputy Prosecutor General.
However, accomplices of such persons can
interrogated by an investigator officer or
prosecutor before transmitting the case file
the Prosecutor General.
Article 171: Grounds for the privilege
jurisdiction and time of consideration
The privilege of jurisdiction serves to protect
official responsibilities but not an individual.
If a person holding the office is prosecuted for
an offence committed while in the same office,
he or she enjoys the privilege of jurisdiction.
If a person is prosecuted for an offence
committed before holding an office to which the
privilege is attached, he or she enjoys the
privilege of jurisdiction if he or she
prosecuted while holding such an office.

If a person who no longer holds an office
which the privilege is attached is prosecuted for
an offence committed while holding the same
office, he or she loses the privilege
jurisdiction.
ubsection 2: Prosecution of Members
Parliament
Article 172: Procedure for prosecuting
members of Parliament
No member of the Parliament suspected of
felony or misdemeanour can be prosecuted
arrested without the authorisation of the
respective Chamber of Parliament to which
or she belongs by voting with a majority of two
thirds (2/3) of members present, except where
the member of the Parliament is caught red-
handed committing a felony or if he or she was
definitively convicted.
The Prosecutor General has the power to ask the
concerned Chamber of Parliament for
authorisation to prosecute one of its members.
He or she receives the reply in a period not
exceeding fifteen (15) days from the day the
concerned chamber received the request. If
response is given within the period specified,
the Prosecutor General notifies the President

the Republic in writing who in turn takes
decision thereof.
CHAPTER III: APPEAL PROCEDURE
Section One: Ordinary appeal procedure
Subsection One: Opposition of a case decided
in absentia
Article 173: Opposition of a case decided
absentia
Opposition seeks to review of a case decided
absentia.
Opposition is instituted by the accused in the
court that decided in absentia the case subjected
to a file for review. Opposition is instituted
the normal procedure of other complaints.
The submissions for opposition must indicate
serious reasons that prevented the defendant
from appearing.

Article 174: Time limits for filing opposition
Opposition is filed in a period of fifteen (15)
days from the date of notification of judgment.
If there is no evidence that the person tried
absentia received the judgment, he or she can
file for opposition at any time before
prescription of the penalty and at any time
before the execution of the judgment in relation
to civil claims.
Article 175: Admissibility of an opposition
Opposition is only admissible if the defendant
who failed to appear gives a serious reason that
prevented him or her from appearing.
The court before which an opposition is filed
has full discretion to determine whether the
reason given for non-appearance is warranted.
However, a person sentenced by Gacaca courts
while abroad is authorized to file for opposition
in competent courts when he or she returns
the country. If he or she returns voluntarily,
or she is prosecuted while free until the
pronouncement of the judgment.

Article 176: Appearance of a person who
files an opposition
A person who files an opposition must appear
in person, if he or she was ordered to do so
the judgment rendered in absentia or the
judgment rendered in absentia ordered his or her
personal appearance as a condition for
admissibility of an opposition.
Article 177: Non-appearance of a person who
files an opposition
If a person who files an opposition again fails
appear, such opposition becomes null, unless
serious and exceptional reason for his or her
absence is given.
Article 178: Interruption of the execution
a judgment in respect of which an opposition
was filed
The execution of the judgment in respect
which an opposition is filed must be stayed.
However, the court having rendered the
judgment in the absence of the accused can
order immediate arrest of the person found
guilty even though he or she can file
opposition.

The court can also order immediate arrest of the
person found guilty when there are serious and
exceptional reasons given to the court having
rendered the judgment in the absence of the
accused.
Article 179: Effects of the admissibility
opposition filed by an accused tried
absentia
If an opposition filed by the accused tried
absentia becomes admissible, the judgment
absentia is revoked. The court retries the case
its entirety.
If the case file involves several persons, some
of whom have appeared while others have not
appeared, all the accused are summoned again.
Subsection 2: Appeal
Article 180: Right to appeal
The right to appeal is exercised by the
following:
1° a convicted person;

2° a person liable for damages;
3° a civil party or persons who were
automatically awarded damages solely
for their civil interests;
4° the Public Prosecution.
Except for the Public Prosecution, appeals
the persons under Paragraph One of this Article
can be filed by their representatives or by their
legal counsels.
Article 181: Time limits for filing an appeal
An appeal must be filed within a period of thirty
(30) days from the pronouncement of the
judgment with respect to a party that was
present or represented at the pronouncement
the judgment. Such time limits also apply to
party duly notified of the date of judgment but
fails to appear or to send a representative.
An appeal is filed within a period of thirty (30)
days from the date the judgment was notified
the party who was not present at the
pronouncement.

Article 182: Appeal procedure
An appeal is filed in the same procedure
filing a claim.
Article 183: Content of written submission
support of appeal
An appeal is filed in the form of a written
submission instituting a claim indicating the
following:
1° full particulars of the appellant and the
accused person on appeal;
2° case under appeal and the court which
rendered the judgement;
3° court seized of the appeal;
4° summary of facts;
5° list of defaults of the judgement for
which rectification is required and other
issues to be considered;
6° explanations for each default or issue
showing the mistakes made and how
they should be rectified in accordance
with laws, evidence and court
recommendation;

7° explanations on additional cases if any.
Article 184: Reaction to the
submission in support of appeal
written
The defendant on appeal prepares a written
submission in the same manner as the appellant.
The statement of defence addresses every issue
according to the list of raised issues by the
appellant and his or her requests to the court.
Article 185: Release notwithstanding appeal
The accused held in provisional detention who
is acquitted or whose penalty has been
suspended or who is only sentenced to pay
fine, is immediately released even if there was
an appeal, unless he or she is held in detention
for another charge of which he or she
informed and under prosecution in accordance
with this Law.
The same applies to the accused held
provisional detention sentenced to a term
imprisonment which is less than or equal to the
time spent in provisional detention.

However, the Public Prosecution can, after
filing an appeal, petition the court seized at the
appeal that the person prosecuted for any of the
offences referred to in this Article with
compelling evidence that his or her release can
disrupt public order be held again in provisional
detention until final judgement on appeal.
The offences are the following:
1° genocide;
2° crimes against humanity;
3° war crimes;
4° violence against a minor;
5° crimes against national security
against security of other States;
6° crimes of terrorism;
7° crimes of treason and espionage.
The Public Prosecution makes such a petition
a period of forty eight (48) hours from the date
the judgment was pronounced. The court seized
at the appeal decides on the petition of the

Public Prosecution within forty eight (48) hours
from the date and time of receipt of the petition.
Article 186: Accused tried while free
If the accused who is free during the trial
sentenced to imprisonment, he or she remains
free when he or she has filed an appeal against
the judgement.
However, the court can order his or her
immediate arrest if the prosecution has provided
sound reasons and parties have discussed such
reasons.
However, the court seized at appeal can order
the detention of the accused if there are serious
and exceptional reasons provided by the Public
Prosecution regarding the summary proceeding.
Article 187: Remaining
notwithstanding appeal
in
detention
The accused held in provisional detention
before the detention judgement is rendered,
remains in detention notwithstanding his or her
appeal. However, the court can grant him or her
provisional release on serious and exceptional
grounds by summary proceedings.

Article 188: Effects of appeal
The accused can appeal against the whole
judgment or some points of judgment of which
he or she is not satisfied. The court seized
appeal hears the case only within the limits
the point on appeal.
When a judgment is appealed, its execution
stayed until the expiration of the time limits for
appeal or, if the appeal is filed, until the decision
on appeal is rendered.
The appeal against the award of damages does
not stay the execution of criminal convictions.
If the accused is the only person having filed
appeal, the appellate court cannot increase the
penalty imposed in the first instance.
Article 189: Withdrawal and writing off an
appeal
The Public Prosecution can withdraw the appeal
if it considers it unnecessary to prosecute the
accused.

The appellant can at any stage of the
proceedings withdraw his or her appeal until the
proceedings are closed.
An appeal can also be written off if the appellant
fails to appear without valid reason or if the
appellant fails to request for hearing within six
(6) months of the filing of the appeal after
failure to appear in a case he or she was
summoned in a lawful procedure.
In case of prescription of the criminal action
withdrawal of the appeal by the appellant, the
court seized of the appeal confirms the appealed
judgment.
Article 190: Appeal against the civil
conviction in case of acquittal of the accused
The party claiming for damages appeals only
with respect to the civil conviction.
However, the acquittal of the accused in the first
instance is not an obstacle for the civil parties
seek damages on appeal. In that case, if the civil
party appeals, the appellate court re-examines
the entire case on the merits.

Article 191: Appeal of the offender required
to pay damages
An offender can appeal against a judgment that
ordered him or her to pay damages. His or her
appeal is limited to civil matters. The case is re-
tried on merits.
Article 192: Annulment of an admitted case
considered through procedures contrary
the law
In case the appellate court believes that the case
decided at first instance through procedures
contrary to the law or that the case was filed
a court that lacks appropriate jurisdiction, but
the court at first instance decided to admit while
it should not admit it, the court seized for appeal
admits the appeal and indicate that the case
subject to appeal was heard by the first instance
court in procedures contrary to law, and annuls
all decisions that are based on that error.
If the error is due to lack of jurisdiction, the
appealed court sends the file to the competent
court. In this case, when the accused is
detention, he or she remains in detention.

If the error is due to another default leading
annulment of judgment, the accused who was
detention is released and any interested person
can file the case afresh.
Article 193: Ordering the court to try the
case it refused to admit
If the appellate court finds that the case was
filed through procedures that comply with the
law and the court that tried it at first instance
declared that the case was not admitted when
was admissible, the appellate court admits the
case and indicates that the case deserved
admission at first instance; annuls it and re-
submits it to the court that tried it in order to
heard on merits with no any other security
payment of court fees.
The court that receives such a case cannot
refuse to hear the case on the pretext that
made a decision on the lack of jurisdiction.
Article 194: Not using two appeal procedures
at the same time
The appellant cannot use, in one case, the
appeal and opposition procedures. The first
chosen procedure entails the loss of the right
resort to the other procedure.

Section 2: Special appeal procedures
Subsection One: Application for review
Article 195: Definition of review
Review means a procedure that aims to annul
judgment that has become final and re-try the
case on the grounds provided under this Law.
Article 196: Persons who can apply for
review
Application for review can be filed by the
following:
1° Public Prosecution;
2° convicted person;
3° a civil party.
If the convict or the victim of the offence
dead, missing or has disappeared, the
application for review can be filed by his or her

spouse, child or other legally recognized heirs
or legatees or those who received from him
her explicit mission to apply for review.
Article 197: Grounds for case review
A case can be reviewed due to one of the
following grounds:
1° if a person convicted of homicide and
later, sufficient evidence is discovered
to confirm that the person the convict
alleged to have killed is alive;
2° if, after the accused is convicted of
offence, and it is subsequently found
that there is a judgment sentencing
another person for the same offence,
that the contradiction between both
judgments shows that one of the
convicted persons is innocent;
3° if the court finds that corruption was
involved in the case and had effects
the judgment;
4° if the judgment was rendered on the
basis of documents, testimonies or oaths
which later turn out to be or are

subsequently declared false by the court
after the judgment;
5° if, after the judgment, new conclusive
evidence sufficiently showing injustice
caused by judgment subject to review
revealed;
6° if the judgment is based on the
proceedings conducted on behalf of
person who did not explicitly
implicitly grant permission to do so
prove or confirm such proceedings.
The evidence referred to under item 5 o
Paragraph One of this Article is such evidence
that the party to the proceedings could not know
its existence and that he or she discovered later
on or evidence that he or she could not get
during the proceedings.
Even when evidence is new, it is taken into
account only when it can contradict the basis for
the ruling on the case for which review
applied.
Regarding cases heard by a Gacaca Court, case
review is accepted only if the convicted person
identifies that the person he or she is alleged
have killed is a live.

Article 198: Competent court to review the
case
Application for review of a case is lodged in the
court that decided the case in the last instance
and the case reviewed by a bench of judges that
did not try it before.
However, the case heard by a Gacaca Court
reviewed by a Primary Court.
Article 199: Filing an action for case review
The action applying for case review is filed
through the same procedure as other actions.
The action applying for case review of a final
judgement is not admitted in case it relates to
case for which review was applied on basis
same evidence or same grounds.

Article 200: Admissibility of case review
The court seized for case review first considers
conditions relating to case admissibility and
decides on it.
Where a case review is not admitted, the first
judgment remains valid.
Article 201: Execution of a judgment during
case review
Case review does not prevent a judgment from
being executed, unless the execution
suspended by the court seized for review.
Article 202: Impossibility of appeal for
ruling made on case review
The judgment of case review does not allow any
form of appeal except on grounds of injustice.

Article 203: Time limit for application for
review
The application for review of a final judgement
must be filed within two (2) months from the
date the event giving rise to the application for
review occurred.
CHAPTER IV: USE OF INTERPRETERS,
TRANSLATORS,
EXPERTS
AND
MEDICAL DOCTORS
Article 204: Language of the court
The language of the court is Ikinyarwanda.
However, the court can conduct the hearing
another official language. The party
proceedings can litigate in a language that he
she understands very well and the court seeks
an interpreter.
Article 205: Translator, expert, interpreter
or medical doctor
Any person duly requested to assist as
interpreter, a translator, an expert or a medical
doctor can do so if there is nothing to prevent
him or her from doing so.

If the person mentioned in Paragraph One
this Article is not a civil servant, he or she
entitled to remuneration proportional to his
her assistance.
Article 206: Determination of trial costs
An Order of the Minister in charge of justice
determines the calculation of fees accorded
witnesses, medical doctors, interpreters and
other experts.
Article 207: Criteria for determining trial
costs
The fees accorded to witnesses, medical doctors
and other experts are determined by the bench
of judges upon reception of documents
containing the following:
1° the day of request for services and the
judge who requested for the services;
2° the type of trial and names of parties
the proceedings;
3° the type of services, the date and period
of service provision, as well
explanations of service costs.

The court can, if necessary, request the parties
in the proceedings to pay the fees needed for
remuneration of an expert or an interpreter or
can pay the fees if it appointed him or her.
The fees referred to under Paragraph One of this
Article are paid by the party found guilty. If the
accused is acquitted, fees are paid out of the
State Treasury.
Article 208: Oath of an expert, interpreter,
translator or medical doctor
Before commencing his or her duty to render
assistance, an expert, interpreter, translator
medical doctor takes the following oath:
“I,................., do hereby swear to perform my
duties as faithfully and professionally
possible and in good faith. Should I fail to
so, can I face the rigours of the law.”
Article 209: Appointment of an interpreter
an expert, a translator or a medical doctor
The President of the Court determines, after
verification, a person appointed as

interpreter, an expert, a translator, or a doctor.
The President can also delegate such powers
other members of staff of the Court under his
her supervision. The person given such powers
takes oath provided in Article 208 of this Law.
An interpreter, a translator or another expert
who previously took oath does not take oath
again if it is necessary for him or her to take the
floor again.
Article 210: Requirements for an expert and
his or her report
The person requesting for the assistance of
expert must clearly specify the items he or she
expects from the expert.
The report submitted by the expert must give
details and the general professional
technicalities must be written in a simple
language.
The expert, the interpreter, the translator or the
medical doctor must make a report according
his or her conscience and expertise.

Article 211: Receiving testimony from people
other than the suspect
An expert can receive testimony from another
person other than the suspect in order for the
testimony to act as proof to assist in discharging
his or her duties effectively.
Article 212: Contradictory opinions
several experts
If several experts are appointed and offer
contradictory opinions or some of them make
reservations to common opinions, each of them
gives his or her opinion or gives reasons for his
or her reservations.
Article 213: Seeking a second opinion from
another expert
If a judge has reason to criticize an expert’s
report, he or she orders a second opinion.

TITLE
IV:
JUDGMENTS
CHAPTER ONE:
COURT DECISION
EXECUTION
EXECUTION
OF
OF
Section One: General provisions
Article 214: Execution of judgments
The execution of a criminal judgment is carried
out when the judgment has become final unless
the court decides otherwise.
A person in charge of the execution of
judgment must have a court document
indicating the decision taken.
Article 215: Voluntary execution of
judgment
A person sentenced to imprisonment
community service is responsible for executing
the judgment by reporting himself or herself
the place of execution.
The voluntary execution of judgment must take
place within thirty (30) days from the final court
judgment. In case of non-execution, this
considered as insubordination to authorities.

Article 216: Persons responsible for the
execution of judgments
Persons responsible for monitoring the
execution of judgments are the following :
1° Rwanda Investigation Bureau, the
Public Prosecution or Rwanda National
Police, in case of imprisonment penalty
and additional penalty;
2° Rwanda Correctional Service, in case
imprisonment penalty;
3° Rwanda National Police or local
Government officers empowered to
so by the Minister in charge of justice
case of sentence of community service;
4° a court bailiff, in case of a fine
damages;
5° a court registrar with respect to the
collection of fines and court fees, if the
property of the sentenced person was
placed under the jurisdiction of the
court.

Article 217: Release of an accused person
who is acquitted
Without prejudice to provisions of Paragraphs
and 4 of Article 185 of this Law, an accused
who is acquitted is immediately released by the
Prison Director upon presentation of a copy
judgment.
If the provisions of Paragraph One of this
Article are not enforced by retaining the
acquitted person in prison, the judge can take
measures provided for under Articles 143, 144
and 145 of this Law.
Article 218: Provisional execution of
judgment
Provisional execution of a judgment
prohibited in criminal cases except in matters
relating to the restitution of property or payment
of damages or when otherwise provided
Law.
Article 219: Foreign criminal judgment
A final foreign criminal judgment can
enforced in Rwanda with regard to penalties
the request of the Public Prosecution.

A final foreign criminal judgment can also
enforced in Rwanda upon request by the victim
of the offence if it includes civil damages whose
execution must take place on the territory of the
Republic of Rwanda.
Article 220: Decision of dissolution of
private institution or organisation with legal
personality
The decision to dissolve a private institution
organisation with legal personality
transmitted to the competent authority
proceed with the dissolution.
Section 2: Imprisonment
Article 221: Serving imprisonment penalty
Imprisonment penalty is served in prison.
Article 222: Detention facilities for women
and minors
Women and minors serve their imprisonment
penalty in special cells reserved for them
prisons.

Section 3: Fine and court fees
Article 223: Payment of fine and court fees
Fine is paid into the State Treasury within
period determined by the court. Such period
cannot exceed one (1) year from the date of final
judgment.
Court fees are paid within a period determined
by the court. Such period cannot exceed six (6)
months from the date of final judgment.
However, the payment of fine and court fees can
be ordered to be made immediately after
pronouncement of the judgment if both parties
are present or from the time of notification
parties when the judgment is pronounced in the
absence of either party if there is a reason to fear
that the convicted person can escape execution
of the penalties.
In that case, the Court Registrar requests the
convicted person either in writing or
registered mail to pay fine and court fees within
the time limits he or she decides.
The person who paid the fine and court fees
submits to the court registrar the certificate
payment of the due fine or court fees.

Article 224: Injunction to pay within the
prescribed time limits
The pronouncement of a judgment in the
presence of both parties or its notification when
pronounced in the absence of either party
considered to be an injunction to pay within the
time limits prescribed by the court.
If the convicted person does not pay in the
prescribed time limits, he or she is forced to pay.
Section 4: Penalty of community service
Article 225: Modalities for the execution of
penalty of community service
A Presidential Order determines modalities for
the execution of a penalty of community
service.

CHAPTER
II:
GROUNDS
FOR
SUSPENSION OF THE EXECUTION OF
PENALTY AND REMOVAL OF
PENALTY
Section One: Grounds for suspension of the
execution of penalty
Article 226: Grounds for suspension of the
execution of penalty
The grounds for suspension of the execution
the penalty are the following:
1° presidential pardon;
2° release on parole;
3° suspension of the penalty.
Subsection One: Presidential pardon
Article 227: Prerogative of pardon of the
President of the Republic
The President of the Republic has the
prerogative of mercy for a convict sentenced
a final judgment, upon application or by his

her own initiative, and after consultation with
the Supreme Court.
Presidential pardon is granted by the President
of the Republic under his or her sole discretion
and for public interest.
Presidential pardon remits in whole or in part
penalties imposed or commute them to less
severe penalties.
Article 228: Presidential pardon
application by a convicted person
on
Application for presidential pardon is lodged
a convict or his or her representative following
the procedure set by the law. The applicant for
presidential pardon indicates reasons for such
application.
Application for presidential pardon is made
writing and addressed to the President of the
Republic through the administration in charge
of correctional services if the applicant is
prison, with a copy to the Minister in charge
justice.
Upon reception of the application
for
presidential pardon by the Commissioner
General of Rwanda Correctional Service, he

she immediately makes a report accompanying
the application indicating the following:
1° identification of the applicant or of the
person for whom presidential pardon
applied;
2° offence for which he or she was
imprisoned;
3° the decision of the court at the last
instance that sentenced him or her;
4° the period completed in serving the
sentence and the remaining period;
5° his or her conduct in the prison with
supporting evidence;
6° advice of Rwanda Correctional Service
on the application for presidential pardon.
Article 229: Collective pardon granted by the
President of the Republic
Collective pardon granted by the President
the Republic is requested by the Minister
charge of justice after presenting justifications.

The request of the Minister in charge of justice
must be accompanied by a report of the
Commissioner General of Rwanda Correctional
service showing:
1° identification of the person for whom
pardon is applied;
2° offence for which the person for whom
pardon is applied was imprisoned;
3° the decision of the court at the last
instance that sentenced the person for
whom pardon is applied;
4° the period completed in serving the
sentence and the remaining period;
5° conduct in prison of the person for
whom pardon is applied with supporting
evidence;
6° advice of Rwanda Correctional Service
on the request of presidential pardon.

Article 230: Instrument through which
presidential pardon is granted
The presidential pardon is granted through
presidential order.
Article 231: Modalities for implementing
presidential pardon
Presidential
pardon
can
be
granted
unconditionally or subject to conditions
indicated in the decision. If the conditions are
not complied with, presidential pardon
automatically revoked and execution of the
penalty resumed.
The prescriptive period of the penalty
suspended during the period between the
notification of presidential pardon to the
recipient and its revocation.

Subsection 2: Release on parole of the
convicted person
Article 232: Grounds for release on parole
A person sentenced to one or several penalties
of imprisonment can be granted release
parole on the following conditions:
1° if he or she sufficiently demonstrates good
behaviour and gives serious pledges
social rehabilitation;
2° if he or she suffers from serious and
incurable disease approved by a recognized
medical doctor;
3° if he or she has already served his or her
penalty for a period of time provided for
under Article 233 of this Law depending
the offences of which he or she was
convicted.
A person who satisfies any of the conditions
provided for under items 1º and 2º of Paragraph
One of this Article must also satisfy the
condition provided under item 3º to be granted
release on parole.

Article 233: Period of imprisonment to
completed before applying for release on
parole
The applicant can be granted release on parole
under the following conditions:
1° if he or she was sentenced
imprisonment for a term not exceeding
five (5) years and has served at least one
third (1/3) of the penalty;
2° if he or she was sentenced
imprisonment for a term exceeding five
(5) years and has served at least two-
third (2/3) of the penalty;
3° if he or she was sentenced to life
imprisonment, he or she cannot benefit
from release on parole unless he or she
has served at least twenty (20) years
imprisonment.
Article 234: Application procedure for
release on parole
A provisional release of a convicted person
requested to the Minister in charge of justice
through the Commissioner General of Rwanda
Correctional Service.

At least once a year, the Commissioner General
of Rwanda Correctional Service submits to the
Minister in charge of justice the list
applicants for provisional release. The list must
show the following:
1 º identification of the applicant for release
on parole;
2 º offence for which the applicant
incarcerated;
3 º the decision of the court at the last
instance that convicted him or her;
4 º the sentence
remainder;
5 º his or her conduct in prison with
supporting evidence;
6 º any other necessary information.
executed
and
the
An order of the Minister in charge of Justice
approves the release on parole of a convicted
person and conditions imposed to him or her.
The decision on release on parole is not subject
to appeal.

Article 235: Revocation of release on parole
The Minister in charge of justice can, upon
request by the Public Prosecution, revoke
release on parole if the person is sentenced for
another offence, shows gross misconduct
breaches conditions imposed by the order
granting release on parole.
In cases of emergency, the Public Prosecution
can order that a person granted release on parole
be re-arrested and immediately inform the
Minister in charge of justice thereof.
Article 236: Effects of revocation of release
on parole
A person whose release on parole is revoked
must serve the whole or part of the remainder
the penalty to be served at the time of release
parole being combined with any other penalty
that can have been subsequently imposed
him or her.
Article 237: Full enjoyment of freedom
If release on parole is not revoked before the
expiry of a period equal to a remainder of the

penalty to be served at the time of release
parole, the convicted person fully enjoys his
her freedom. In that case, the penalty
considered to be completed from the date
release on parole was granted.
Article 238: Limitation period for the
execution of penalties
In case the release on parole has not been
revoked, the limitation period for the
enforcement of penalties is suspended.
Section 3: Suspension of a penalty
Article 239: Suspension of execution
penalties
If the convicted person was not previously
given another penalty of imprisonment
exceeding six (6) months, the court can, through
a justified order, suspend execution of all or part
of the main or additional penalties imposed
provided that the main penalty imposed does
not exceed five (5) years.

Article 240: Suspended penalty considered
null and void
A suspended penalty is considered null and void
if, within a prescribed period which is not less
than one year and not more than five (5) years,
the convicted person is not subsequently
prosecuted and convicted of a felony
misdemeanour committed after the decision
granting suspension of the enforcement
penalties has become final.
Otherwise, penalties of which enforcement has
been suspended and those subsequently
imposed are combined and enforced.
Article 241: Effects of suspension of penalty
Suspension of penalty does not prevent the
payment of court fees and damages. Nor does
extend to the deprivation of rights as a result
conviction. However, deprivation of rights
ceases to have effect on the date the offence
becomes null and void.

Section 2: Grounds for removal of a penalty
Subsection One: Amnesty
Article 242: Definition of amnesty
Amnesty is a pardon granted in public interests
in connection with offences which were
committed in a given period.
Amnesty is initiated by the Government and
approved by the Parliament.
An amnesty law does not list the names
individuals granted amnesty. It rather states
offences or categories of persons subject to the
amnesty.
Article 243: Effects of amnesty
Amnesty extinguishes criminal liability.
extinguishes penalty imposed and all the
consequences of the offence.
However, amnesty does not exempt the
convicted person from payment of damages

ordered by a court decision that sentenced him
or her. It also does not prevent civil action based
on offence.
If there is ideal concurrence of offences,
amnesty applies to concurrent offences, if the
offence covered by amnesty is punishable with
a penalty heavier than or equal to other penalties
imposed even if the judges would have imposed
a lesser penalty after accepting mitigating
circumstances of the offence covered
amnesty.
If there is real concurrence of offences, amnesty
only applies to the offence covered by amnesty.
Amnesty has no effect on administrative
sanctions.
Article 244: Amnesty subject to conditions
An amnesty law can provide for conditions
be observed.

Subsection 2: Rehabilitation
Article 245: Person who can be rehabilitated
Any person sentenced to a penalty can
rehabilitated.
Article 246: Time required before applying
for rehabilitation
Rehabilitation can be granted after five (5) years
if during that time a convicted person has
continuously and effectively demonstrated
good behaviour.
Such time runs from:
1° the date the conviction becomes final
for a person sentenced to a fine or
community service;
2° from the date of final release or that
release on parole that has not been
revoked for the one sentenced
imprisonment.
For recidivists and convicted persons whose
penalty is extinguished by prescription, such

time is ten (10) years from the date of release
from the start of the limitation period for the
enforcement of penalties.
Article 247: Conditions for rehabilitation
A convicted person must prove payment
court fees, fines and damages or an exemption
from payment thereof, unless the limitation
period for the execution of the judgment has
expired.
If the convicted person fails to prove payment
or exemption, he or she must prove that there
no longer any payment claim against him or her.
However, if the convicted person proves, upon
presentation of a certificate of indigence issued
by the relevant authority, that he or she
extremely poor so that he or she could not afford
to pay pecuniary penalties, he or she can
granted rehabilitation whether pecuniary
penalties are not paid or are paid in part.
Article 248: Determining the pecuniary
amount to be paid by a person applying for
rehabilitation
In case there are persons who are jointly and
severally liable, but the person applying for

rehabilitation cannot afford to pay the entire
pecuniary amount ordered by the court, the
court can determine the amount to be paid
the applicant.
Article 249: Disposal of the pecuniary
amount that is not received by a person
whom it is awarded
If the victim of an offence cannot be found
refuses to take the pecuniary amount awarded
him or her, such an amount is kept in the State
Treasury.
If the recipient party does not collect the money
within five (5) years, the pecuniary amount
devolves on the State Treasury.
Article 250: Applying for rehabilitation
A convicted person applies for rehabilitation
writing to the High Court or the Military High
Court for cases tried by military courts. The
application specifies the date of conviction and
all places where the convicted person has lived
since the time of release.
The Court immediately forwards the
application to the Public Prosecution or Military

Prosecution for advice on the conduct of the
person applying for rehabilitation. The Public
Prosecution must provide advice on the
application within thirty (30) days from
reception of the file.
The High Court or the Military High Court
decides on the application within one (1)
months from the date of advice of the
prosecution.
Article 251: Decision on the application for
rehabilitation
After considering the advice of the Public
Prosecution and hearing the opinion of the
applicant, the court can accept or reject the
application for rehabilitation.
If the first application is rejected due to non-
observance of the time provided for in Article
246 of this Law, the application can be renewed
only after the expiration of the prescribed period
of time. However if the application for
rehabilitation is rejected for other reasons, it
not re-submitted before the expiration of two (2)
years.

Article 252: Effects of rehabilitation
Rehabilitation extinguishes a penalty and all
consequences.
Article 253: Revocation of rehabilitation
Rehabilitation is automatically revoked
within a period of five (5) years following the
grant of rehabilitation, the person granted
rehabilitation commits an offence punishable
with imprisonment equal to or exceeding five
(5) years.
The revocation of rehabilitation is decided
the court which granted on the application of the
Public Prosecution and after hearing the person
who had been granted rehabilitation
In case of revocation, rehabilitation
considered as never having been granted.

CHAPTER III: COURT FEES
Section One: Deposit of court fees
Article 254: Determination and deposit
court fees
The deposit of court fees is determined by
Order of the Minister in charge of justice. The
court fees are deposited in the following cases:
1° file a claim of damages;
2° file a case
prosecution;
by
way
of
private
3° file an opposition;
4° file an appeal;
5° file an application for review.
Court fees charged by Primary or Intermediate
Courts devolve on the District account. Court
fees charged by other courts devolve on the
State Treasury.

Additional court fees to be paid in order
supplement the amount previously deposited
are determined by the judge.
Article 255: Court fees for a case tried at the
first instance
If the accused is acquitted, court fees are paid
out of the State Treasury. However, if a party
who filed a claim by way of private prosecution
loses the case, he or she is ordered to pay all the
fees involved in the case. If a person who sued
for damages in criminal proceedings loses the
case, he or she is ordered to pay half (1/2) of the
court fees.
A civil party who withdraws a claim which was
filed within the criminal proceedings or by way
of private prosecution, is not required to pay
court fees after withdrawal of the claim.
However, this does not exempt him or her from
being ordered to pay damages to the accused
to the person liable to pay damages,
necessary.
Article 256:Court fees in case of appeal
If an appeal is filed only by the Public
Prosecution and the decision subjected
appeal is not altered, court fees are borne by the
State Treasury.

If the penalty imposed in case of a decision
subjected to appeal is reduced, the accused
bears part of the court fees but he or she is fully
exempted from paying such fees if he or she
tried while in detention.
When there is appeal concerning damages only,
the losing party bears all the court fees.
Article 257: Exemption from depositing
court fees when filing a case
The following persons are exempted from
depositing court fees when filing a case:
1° indigent with a certificate issued
competent authority;
2° Government of Rwanda with the
exception of its institutions and organs
with legal status;
3° persons in prison;
4° children represented by the indigent;

5° representatives of children who filed
claim of damages in proceedings related
to child defilement.
Persons provided for under this Article who
not pay court fees are also exempted from
paying court fees when they lose the case.
Article 258: Calculation of court fees
The statement of court fees is prepared by the
Court Registrar. If there is a civil party, the
statement indicates fees to be deducted from
court fees deposited by the civil party and the
amount to be paid by the losing party. The
statement of court fees is verified and signed
the President of the Court.
Article 259: Court fees withheld
The Court Registrar deducts court fees from the
amount deposited even if the civil party wins
the case. The losing party reimburses the
winning party for the amount deducted from
deposited fees.
However, if the civil party did not initiate the
case but his or her case emanates from
proceedings already initiated, the court registrar

only deducts fees associated with those
proceedings conducted upon his or her request.
Section 2: Rate of court fees
Article 260: Cost of documents served by
courts
Any page of court file is paid when the applicant
wants to take it with him or her.
An Order of the Minister in charge of justice
determines the cost of each page.
The persons exempted from paying the deposit
of court fees are also exempted from paying the
documents referred to in this Article when they
need them. At the bottom of the issued page,
is written that it is issued free of charge, the
reason for being issued free of charge and
proof, and the copy is kept in the court.

TITLE V: MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL
PROVISIONS
CHAPTER ONE:
PROVISIONS
MISCELLANEOUS
Article 261: Time limits provided under laws
relating to criminal procedure
Unless otherwise provided by the law, the time
limits provided for under laws relating
criminal procedure follow provisions specified
under this Chapter.
Article 262: Time limits counted in days
hours
Time limits counted in days and hours are
counted from midnight to midnight of the
following day and do not include the day of the
act or event from which they arise while they
fully include the day on which they expire.
The appeal period can in no way be extended,
unless serious and exceptional reasons arise
until they cease to exist.

Public holidays and non-working days are
included in the prescribed time limits.
However, when the last day of the time limits
coincides with a public holiday or a non-
working day, the time limits end on the next
working day.
Article 263: Counting periods fixed
months and years
The periods fixed in months and years are
counted from the first day to the eve of the last
day.
Article 264: Applying civil procedure
criminal matters
All matters that are not provided for under this
Law regarding procedure are handled
accordance with civil procedure rules, unless
the civil procedure principles cannot
applicable in criminal matters.

CHAPTER II: FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 265: Drafting, consideration and
adoption of this Law
This Law was drafted, considered and adopted
in Ikinyarwanda.
Article 266: Repealing provision
Law nº 30/2013 of 24/5/2013 relating to the
code of criminal procedure and all prior legal
provisions contrary to this Law are repealed.
Article 267: Commencement
This Law comes into force on the date of its
publication in the Official Gazette of the
Republic of Rwanda.

Kigali, on 19/09/2019
(sé)
KAGAME Paul
President of the Republic
(sé)
Dr NGIRENTE Edouard
Prime Minister
Seen and sealed with the Seal of the
Republic:
(sé)
BUSINGYE Johnston
Minister of Justice /Attorney General